[MUSIC] JOHN: I'm John and this is Dave.
DAVE: I'm Dave while is John.
JOHN: Now, many times during the previous videos,
we've remarked that one sentence means the same thing as another sentence.
In the previous lecture,
we made this idea precise introducing the idea of tautological equivalence.
DAVE: In this video, we're going to be systematic and
introduce a collection of pairs of equivalent sentences.
One such pair, for example,
is "not not P" and "P". These are tautologically equivalent sentences.
Introducing these pairs of equivalent sentences is, of course,
useful to help us understand how different sentences relate to one another,
and to become familiar with the sentences which are
disguised versions of other sentences so to speak.
DAVE: But more importantly, we can draw some conclusions
about our language by considering these equivalences.
There are two things that we'll do with
this collection of equivalences that we're going to describe.
The first is to define a set of "normal forms".
Normal form as a kind of standard way of presenting
a sentence and we'll show that every sentence can be presented in the standard way.
JOHN: Now, the second thing that we'll do is demonstrate that the language of
propositional logic is as expressive as it's possible for a language,
based on truth-functional connectives to be.
That is, we can keep adding truth-functional connectives if we want to,
but doing so will not enable us to express
a proposition that we're not already able to express.
New connectives may be convenient,
but they don't add to the power of the language in any me- meaningful way.
DAVE: That's an important result.
But before we get to it, let's begin by thinking about
the relationships between some of the sentences in our language.
JOHN: In a recent video, we spoke about the idea of tautological equivalence.
Two sentences are tautologically equivalent if
they're true in exactly the same rows of the truth table.
This is an idea that we referred to in passing before we introduced it formally.
For example, when we introduced the negation connective,
we said that double negations had the effect of canceling each other out.
What we were really saying, of course,
is that the sentence "not not P" is tautologically equivalent to
the sentence "P". You should check this to get some practice using the truth table method.
This is a simple example of how the language of
propositional logic allows us to say the same things in different ways.
We can use the sentence "not not P" to mean exactly the same thing as
"P". The two sentences are true in exactly the same situations.
JOHN: In this video, we're going to look at a number of different equivalences,
which demonstrate that there are different ways to
say the same thing in our propositional language.
Later, we'll extend this observation to draw
some conclusions about the expressiveness of our language.
But for now, we'll focus on some simple equivalences.
We're going to classify these equivalences according
to the connectives that they involve,
just as a way of organizing them.
Now, because we're lazy,
we're going to use this double arrow has a short way
of writing the words "is tautologically equivalent to".
This is not a new symbol of FOL,
rather it's a symbol of the language that we use to talk about FOL.
It's really an abbreviation for a bunch of English words.
You'll never see this symbol in Tarski's World or in any sentence of FOL.
This rule of double negation concerns just the negation connective.
If we turn our attention to the conjunction connective,
it will probably come as no surprise that the sentence "A and
B" is tautologically equivalent to the sentence "B and A".
This simple fact has actually a fancy name,
"the commutativity of conjunction".
A binary connective is commutative if
the order of the formulas that it contains doesn't matter.
We trust that you can build a truth table to
demonstrate that these two sentences are equivalent.
Remember, build a joint truth table for both sentences,
and then check to see that the sentences are true in exactly the same rows.
DAVE: Another fact about conjunction is that it's "associative".
This means that the sentences "A and parenthesis B and C close parenthesis",
and the sentence "open parenthesis A and B close parenthesis,
and C" are equivalent.
The sentences just differ in the position of
the parentheses or how the conjunctions associate with one another.
We'll demonstrate this fact by building a truth table.
It's slightly more interesting and demanding than the case of commutativity.
JOHN: First, we fill in the reference columns for the three atomic sentences.
Remember that there are going to be eight rows in this case.
DAVE: Now, we can fill in the values for the first sentence,
and for the second.
JOHN: Now, when we check the truth values for the two sentences,
we notice that the sentences are true and exactly the same rows.
The fact that conjunction is associative justifies the decision in
our language not to require parentheses in sentences like this.
So recall that, you can simply write "A and B,
and C", in the Tarski's World program with no parentheses whatsoever.
We should also mention that the sentence "A
and A" is tautologically equivalent to just plain "A".
If you form with a conjunction of a formula with itself,
you're not adding any information;
you're just repeating yourself.
Disjunction has these very same three properties.
Disjunction is also commutative, associative, and idempotent.
JOHN: Now, let's think about the ways in which disjunction and
conjunction can interact with one another in the same sentence.
There's an important fact about conjunction and disjunction called distribution.
It means that these two sentences are equivalent.
"A and parenthesis B or C" is equivalent to" parenthesis A and B end parenthesis,
or parenthesis A and C".
DAVE: Before we demonstrate this fact,
let's convince ourselves if it's plausible.
If the first sentence "A and (B or C)" is true,
then both the sentence "A" and the disjunction "B or C" must be true.
For the disjunction to be true,
then one of the disjuncts,
"B" or "C", must be true.
So this tells us that for the whole sentence to be true,
either "A" and the disjunct "B" are both true,
or "A" and the disjunct "C" are both true.
That's exactly what the second sentence says.
JOHN: So suppose I'm not convinced,
that was pretty quick, Dave.
So let's build a truth table just to be
sure that what Dave told us was actually that case.
DAVE: Okay. We write both sentences in the target spots for a joint truth table.
Once again, there are three atomic sentences, and we,
therefore, have eight rows in the truth table to complete.
Let's fill in the columns for
the disjunction in the first sentence and then the conjunction.
JOHN: And now we can do the second sentence,
starting with the two conjunctions,
we fill in those, and then completing the table for the main disjunction.
And lo and behold,
the sentences have exactly the same truth values in each row of the truth table.
DAVE: An important thing to notice about this equivalence is it provides a way to
rearrange the connectives within the sentence without changing it's truth values.
In the first of the sentences,
the disjunction is embedded inside the scope of the conjunction and in the second,
the disjunction is at the top level with the conjunction symbols embedded within it.
You may recall in math class but don't worry if you don't,
that "a times (b plus c)" is equal to
"(a times b) plus (a times c)". This equivalence, the logical equivalence,
has exactly the same form as the distribution law we just discussed,
with conjunction playing the role of multiplication,
and disjunction playing the role of addition.
JOHN: Now, we're going to present a few more equivalent pairs of sentences in
the remainder of this lecture but we're not going to show any more truth tables.
You should be sure to complete them,
particularly if you're unsure that the pairs of sentences are equivalent.
If it's not obvious to you,
then do the truth table.
The next pair of equivalent sentences is just like the one we looked at,
except the roles of the disjunction and conjunction are reversed.
So this one says,
"A or (B and C)" is equivalent to "(A or B)
and (A or C)". This allows us to take a conjunction symbol that's embedded
within a disjunction and move it so
the conjunction symbol is at the top level of the formula.
DAVE: Sadly, the analogy with mathematics breaks down here.
If you replace disjunction with
addition and conjunction with multiplication in this equivalence,
the resulting math fact is not true.
JOHN: In other words it's not a fact.
DAVE: Yes.
JOHN: Okay, conjunction and disjunction are more similar
to one another than addition and multiplication.
DAVE: So we've looked at equivalences involving just negations,
double negation, just conjunctions,
commutativity idempotence and associativity,
just disjunctions, also idempotence commutativity and associativity,
and a mixture of conjunctions and disjunctions,
and these are called the distribution rules.
Two very important rules relate all three Boolean connectives together.
These are called "De Morgan's Laws" after the English logician who first studied them.
JOHN: And I guess they're important because they're called laws.
DAVE: De Morgan. Not just a good idea,
it's the law. [LAUGHTER]
JOHN: Okay. So the first De Morgan's law says that these two formulas are equivalent.
"It's not the case that (A and B)" is equivalent to "not A or not B".
So let's think about this for a moment.
Think about what the sentences say.
The first says, that it's not the case that both "A" and "B" are true.
But if that's true,
then at least one of" "A and "B" must not be true.
That is either "A"s not true, or "B"s not true.
Which of course, is exactly what the second sentence says.
DAVE: De Morgan's second law is just like the first,
except that it has the roles of conjunction and disjunction exchanged.
The negation of "A or B" is equivalent to the negation of "A" and the negation of "B".
If neither "A" nor "B" is true,
then both "A" is not true and "B" is not true.
Remember, you should build the truth tables to check what they're telling you for
practice with the method and because a truth table a day keeps the doctor away.
JOHN: Or something like that.
Anyway, so we're going to return to
these equivalences relating the Boolean connectives in the next part of this lecture.
But before we do that,
let's look at equivalences involving the conditional connectives.
DAVE: We've already encountered one important equivalence which
relates material implication to the Boolean connectives.
One important observation that you can make about this equivalence,
is that there was no need to introduce the conditional connective into our language.
Anything that we can express using the material conditional connective,
we can express using only Boolean connectives,
in fact, using just disjunction and negation.
JOHN: But this isn't to say that introducing the connective was not worthwhile.
We need our language to do two things not just
ensure that we can express everything that we want to say,
but also that we can do it in a natural way.
Since there are many English language expressions that involve conditionals, "if...then...",
"... if ..." and so forth,
it makes sense to have a connective in our language to naturally express these ideas.
The structure of the FOL sentence can more naturally
reflect or match the structure of the English sentence that they translate.
DAVE: Right. It would be quite unnatural to translate,
"if Max is at home then Claire's at the library",
using the sentence, "not Home(max) or Library(claire)".
The truth conditions of these two sentences are the same,
but it's hard to see that they are equivalent.
And having material conditional connective allows us
to match the structure of the English, is quite convenient.
JOHN: Another equivalence involving conditionals is the following,
"not if P then Q" is logically equivalent to "P and not Q".
We've said before that the only way in which the conditional statement is false
is if the antecedent is true and the consequent false.
This equivalence captures that idea.
We can demonstrate this equivalence using a new technique.
Rather than write a truth table for the two sentences,
we can try to rewrite the first formula into the
second using equivalences that we've already learned.
DAVE: For example, we know that "not P implies Q" is too logically equivalent to "not,
not P or Q", because we know that "P arrow Q" is equivalent to "not P or Q".
So we can transform the sentence "not P arrow Q" into the sentence "not,
not P or Q" and preserve the truth values.
In the next step, we push the outer negation into the disjunction,
using one of De Morgan's laws.
Remember De Morgan's law tells us that the negation of
a disjunction is the conjunction of the two negated formulae,
so in this case, the formulae "not,
not P" and "not Q".
And finally, we can remove the double negation to obtain the formulae we want.
Since each of these steps is based on an equivalence,
each of the formulae in the sequence is guaranteed to be equivalent to all of the others.
JOHN: Our final equivalence involving material conditional is called "contraposition".
It says that, "if P then Q" is logically equivalent to, "if not Q,
then not P". So this equivalence says that if "Q" is true
provided that "P" is then "Q" will not be true implies that "P" is also not true.
If it were true, then "Q" would have to be.
We're going to leave this as an exercise to show that these are equivalent you should use
either a truth table or come up with a chain of equivalences to demonstrate this.
DAVE: We don't have very much to say about material biconditional.
We already know that there is an equivalence involving
the biconditional and conditional connectives,
"P if and only if Q" is equivalent to "(P implies Q) and
(Q implies P)". But there's one more equivalence that is worth mentioning.
It is that "P if and only if Q" is equivalent to "either P and Q,
or not P and not Q".
This says that if the material biconditional is true,
then either P and Q are both true, or both false.
And also if they have the both- both have
the same truth value then the biconditional is true.
JOHN: In the next part of the course,
we're going to put these equivalences to work.
We'll show how to manipulate formulas to make them more easily understandable.
[MUSIC]
