[MUSIC] JOHN: In this video
we're going to show how to manipulate sentences into equivalent forms,
forms which are often easier to understand.
In all of the following discussion,
we will assume that the sentences in question contain only the Boolean connectives,
that's, conjunction disjunction and negation.
DAVE: We've already discussed equivalences that allow us to replace sentences
involving the conditional connectives with
equivalent sentences that only involves Boolean connectives.
So if you want to apply the ideas that we're about to
present to a formula that contains conditional connectives,
you should first start by eliminating all of them using these equivalences.
So we're going to focus on the collection of equivalences
that relate to Boolean connectives to one another.
We're particularly going to exploit the rules of distribution and DeMorgan's law.
JOHN: It can be helpful to have standard forms for writing sentences.
If a sentence is written in a particular way,
it can be easier to see the conditions under which the sentence is true.
DAVE: Math analogy alert.
This is a polynomial.
You may have seen such expressions in math class.
Don't worry if you don't remember.
If this example isn't helpful then don't worry about it.
JOHN: So this polynomial is written in a conventional form.
Because addition is commutative,
we could put the terms in any order we choose.
But mathematicians always write polynomials with the highest power of
x in the leftmost position decreasing to the lowest power on the right.
DAVE: The highest power tells you about the shape of the graph of the polynomial.
So it's good to know where to locate it and
mathematicians always write it on the leftmost position.
And when you add polynomials you have to add terms of the same power.
So it helps if they're in the same order.
JOHN: So the situation is kind of similar in logic.
But it's much easier.
We can define standard forms which makes
sentences easier to understand and we can give
procedures for taking any formula and turning it
into an equivalent formula of this standard form.
We call these standard forms "normal forms"
and we're going to introduce three different types right now.
DAVE: Three! What a deal!
We can use DeMorgan's Laws to move negation symbols around within a sentence.
In particular, we can use these rules to take a sentence with
a binary connective within the scope of a negation symbol and write it,
so the negation symbols have smaller scope.
The binary symbol switches type and ends up with the largest scope.
JOHN: Right. So DeMorgan's laws allow us to move the negations inside of
either conjunctions or disjunctions and then we
change the conjunctions to a disjunction and vice versa.
If a negation symbol has a negation symbol immediately
in it's scope then rule of double negation allows us to remove both of them.
DAVE: One result of these three rules is that we can rewrite any sentence involving
only the Boolean connectives as an equivalent sentence
where the negation symbols apply only to atomic sentences.
We say that a sentence like this is in "negation normal form".
It's our first of the three forms that we're going to talk about.
This is true because if we start with a sentence that has
a negation symbol that doesn't apply to an atom,
it must apply to either another negation or a conjunction or a disjunction.
If it applies to another negation that's the easiest case.
We can remove both by using the rule of double negation.
In the case of conjunctions and disjunctions we can use
the appropriate De Morgan's law to reduce the scope of the negation symbol.
JOHN: Either the sentence that results is in negation normal form or there's
a negation in the sentence that doesn't apply to an atomic sentence.
In which case, we can repeat this process.
DAVE: Let's see an example of this.
We're going to consider this sentence for no particular reason.
JOHN: Okay. So the first thing that you should notice is that there's a negation symbol,
two in fact, that don't apply to atomic formulas.
Now, that means that this formula is not a negation normal form as it stands.
I'm going to choose to focus on the outermost negation symbol The
one at the left whose scope is the whole formula.
You can tell that because of the parentheses.
DAVE: The immediate sub formula of this negation symbol that we've chosen is a conjunction.
It's the conjunction whose left conjunct is "P" and
whose right conjunct is this quite complicated formula involving "R", "S", "Q",
and "T". But this is a negation applied to a conjunction,
so we can use one of DeMorgan's laws to reduce the scope of this negation symbol.
When we do, we see that the resulting formula is a disjunction whose left-hand disjunct
is "not P" and whose right hand disjunct is
the negation of that complicated formula involving "R", "S", "Q", and "T".
We remove the outer negation symbol,
turn the conjunction into a disjunction,
and negate both of the disjuncts.
JOHN: So the main connective of this new formula is a disjunction,
and that negation symbol on the far left has as
a scope just the single formula atomic formula "P".
DAVE: So everything to the left of the disjunction symbol is in negation normal form,
that negation symbol now applies to an atom.
But the other negation symbol,
the one that applies to this complicated formula,
the negation symbol we just introduced
has a scope that's bigger than just an atomic sentence.
In fact, the scope of this negation is now
the disjunction whose first disjunct is the formula "R and not S"
and the second disjunct is the formula "not Q and
T". We can use the other DeMorgan's law to simplify this formula.
We remove the negation symbol,
change the disjunction into conjunction,
and negate both conjuncts to obtain the formula "not P or" (just as before),
and then the conjunction "not R and not S and not not Q and T".
JOHN: Now there's a pretty obvious thing to do now.
Because notice that the rule of double negation will
allow us to remove the pair of negations that we just created.
That is the "not not" that appears in front of the formula "Q and
T". So that gives us the simpler formula "not P or paran.
not R and not S and Q and T".
DAVE: Now, there's only one negation symbol that has a compound formula in its scope.
The one dominating the conjunction "R and not S". Once again,
we can apply one of DeMorgan's laws to allow
us to move that disjunction and reduce its scope.
We obtain the formula,
so we're going to apply it to "not R and not S". So the conjunction is going
to turn into a disjunction and we're going to obtain "not R or not not S".
JOHN: Then we can again use the Double Negation Law to remove the pair of
negations that dominated "S" and our final result is this much cleaner simpler sentence.
"Not P or both not R or S and Q and T".
Now we know that this is the final result because
both negation symbols in this formula dominate only an atomic formula.
"P" and "R" in this case.
So this formula is in negation normal form.
DAVE: So remember, a formula is in negation normal
form if every negation symbol applies to only an atomic formula.
There are no negations that negate conjunctions,
disjunctions or other negations anywhere in the formula.
If a formula is not a negation normal form,
it can be put into negation normal form by selecting a negation symbol,
which is out of place, so to speak,
and applying the relevant equivalence to reduce the scope of the negation symbol.
Double negation is used if the negation symbol has another negation inside it and
the relevant DeMorgan's law is used when
the negation symbol dominates either a conjunction or a disjunction.
JOHN: So always use the equivalences so that you reduce the scope of the negation sign,
and then you repeat as long as there are negation symbols out of place,
and you'll eventually obtain a formula that's in a negation normal form.
DAVE: Now, remember, this procedure only works for
sentences which contain only Boolean connectives.
We have assumed that you've removed the conditional connectives before we start.
JOHN: Well, Dave, this formula is simpler than the one that we started with,
but I have to say that it's not that much easier to understand.
True. It's a little better but there's more that we can do.
We will say that a sentence is in "conjunctive normal form" if it is
a negation normal form and
no conjunctions symbols occur within the scope of a disjunction symbol.
So roughly, the sentences in conjunctive normal form if it is
a conjunction and none of the conjuncts contain further conjunction symbols.
Because we said that the formula also has to be a negation normal form,
each of these conjuncts must be disjunctions.
JOHN: Since a sentence in conjunctive normal form or "CNF" is a conjunction,
it's true only if each of its conjuncts are true.
Notice that this formula is a disjunction,
it definitely is not in CNF.
The first disjunct is just a negated atom,
but the right is this complex formula,
which is a conjunction.
DAVE: What we want to do is exchange the position of the disjunction and conjunction symbols.
To put the formula in CNF,
we need to make the top-level connective a conjunction.
Using the rule of distribution,
we can change this formula into an equivalent form;
the formula ("not P or (not R or S)),
and (not P or (Q and T))". So here
we've used the rule of distribution which is written "A or (B and C)",
where "A" is the formula "not P",
"B" is the formula "not R or S",
and "C" is the formula of "Q and T". We've applied that rule
so that we obtain "(A or B) and (A or C)" or,
in this case, "(not P or (not R or S)) and (not P or (Q and T))".
JOHN: Now that looks a little worse, in fact.
But notice that this formula is now a conjunction.
Further, the first left conjunct of this formula has only disjunctions in it.
Because disjunction is associative,
we can remove the inner parenthesis and obtain "parenthesis not P or not R
or S" and "not P or (Q and T)". Now,
it looks a little better.
But there's still a mixture of conjunctions and disjunctions in the second conjunct.
The formula is not in CNF because
that conjunction is within the scope of a disjunction symbol.
DAVE: So we can use that very same rule again.
This case "A" is the formula "not P",
and "B" is the formula "Q",
and "T" is the formula "C",
and we're going to rewrite this formula as just talking about
the second conjunct "(not P or Q) and (not P or T)". Now,
this sentence is beginning to look a lot simpler,
particularly since we can drop the parentheses.
So we end up with the conjunction of "(not P or not R or S),
and (not P or Q)",
and "not P or T".
JOHN: Now, we can see that this sentence is the conjunction of
three things and each of these components is a disjunction.
We can tell that this formula can only be true if each of the conjuncts is true.
Each of these conjuncts can only be true if one of their disjuncts is true.
So we can immediately see that if "S", "Q",
and "T" are all true,
for example, then this formula will be too.
DAVE: That's because "S" is a disjunct of the first conjunction,
"Q" is a disjunct of the second conjunct,
and "T" is a disjunct of the third conjunct.
If those three things are true,
then the three disjunctions are all true,
and therefore, so is the whole formula.
So this is an example of what we mean when
we say that the formula is easier to understand.
Because the connectives are organized within the formula,
we can more easily see the conditions under which the formula is true.
JOHN: By now, you've probably come to expect that everything that we say about
conjunctions we'll also say in a similar way about disjunction.
You would not be wrong.
The third normal form that we will describe is "Disjunctive Normal Form", DNF.
A sentence is in disjunctive normal form if it's in a negation normal form,
and in addition, none of
the disjunction connectives are within the scope of a conjunction.
DAVE: So returning to our example formula in negation normal form,
you can see that the sentence is not in disjunctive normal form either because
the disjunction "not R or S" is within the scope of a conjunction symbol.
Once again, the distribution rules will come into play.
Focusing on the formula "(not R or S) and (Q and T)",
we can apply the distribution rule to this formula to obtain "(not
R and Q and T) or (S and Q and T)". In context,
the whole formula becomes "not P,
or (not R and Q and T),
or (S and Q and T)".
JOHN: This formula is, in fact,
in disjunctive normal form.
It's the disjunction of three disjuncts,
each of these disjuncts is a conjunction.
Well, the first disjunct is actually a conjunction with just one conjunct.
We can easily see that there are three ways that this formula can be true,
one for each of the disjuncts.
Case one is that" "P is false.
Case two, "R" is false,
and "Q" and "T" are both true or case three.
"S", "Q", and "T" are all true.
Notice that this last case is the one that we pointed out was
easily visible from the formula in CNF.
[MUSIC]
