[MUSIC] JOHN: Hi. By now,
you don't need me to tell you my name.
DAVE: [LAUGHTER] Me either.
We've come to the last video in our course on the semantics of FOL.
In this video, we're going to present a summary of the main points of the course.
You can use it as the basis of your study for
the final exam or you can return to it in the future if you need a reminder.
JOHN: And of course, this video will serve to show how much ground we've covered in the course.
Perhaps you remember when we started out by discussing atomic formulas.
DAVE: I hope so.
JOHN: This was where we began the formulation of first-order logic.
We started by identifying the simplest possible propositions
in the natural language and building a model of them in FOL.
By simplest possible, we mean that these sentences have
no smaller parts that can make claims about the world.
DAVE: So even formalizing the simplest possible sentences,
required us to make some important decisions.
We had to insist that every name that's used picks out just one object
or any property or relation that we use is precisely defined.
We insist on these constraints in order to make FOL
well-behaved in the sense that it's more precise than English.
These constraints already begin to reveal that FOL is
an approximation to or a model of natural language in its full glory.
DAVE: The next step in the development was to devise a way to connect sentences together
to make more complex sentences to express more complex claims.
To do this, we introduced the propositional connectives;
the Boolean connectives, conjunction, disjunction,
and negation, and the conditional connectives
known as material implication and material equivalence.
JOHN: We introduced another important idea with propositional connectives,
the idea of truth functionality.
We said that we could work out the truth value of a complex sentence by
considering only the truth values of
the component sentences and then the connectives that join them.
DAVE: This is a really simple and important idea and it
makes the theory of propositional logic quite easy to understand.
One of the results of this decision is that we get to use
truth tables to describe the semantics of the propositional connectives.
And also, there is a nice procedure for working out the truth of
an arbitrarily complex sentence just
from the knowledge of the truth of the atomic subformula.
It turns out that there are downsides to this decision too as you know.
Nonetheless, we adopt the notion of
truth functionality even while we're well aware of its drawbacks.
JOHN: With our theory of propositional logic in hand,
we can start to examine some of the key ideas that are central to the
course. The most important idea is logical consequence.
We're interested in the question of when one formula follows from another.
And we use our theory to model this intuitive idea.
DAVE: Now intuitively, we say that one sentence, the consequence,
follows from another premise sentence just when
the truth of the premise sentence guarantees the truth of the consequence sentence.
Or equivalently, when it's impossible for
the premise formula to be true and the consequence formula false.
Given the theory of propositional logic,
it's easy to test to see when this relationship holds.
We translate our sentences into FOL and then build
a truth table for both of the sentences together.
JOHN: Each row of the truth table represents
a possible combination of truth values for the atomic formula in sentences.
For any such row,
we can determine the truth of our larger sentences.
By constructing a truth table with one row for each possible combination,
we can consider all the possible situations that the sentences might be used in.
If in every row that makes the premise sentence true,
the consequence sentence is also true,
then we say that the consequence sentence is
a logical consequence of the premise sentence.
DAVE: Now, to distinguish between the intuitive notion of
logical consequence and the precise test that John just described,
we gave the result of the precise test a new name.
We called it tautological consequence.
One sentence is a tautological consequence of
another if it's true in every row that the other sentence is.
If one sentence is a tautological consequence of another,
then it's definitely a logical consequence.
That's because every genuine situation must be represented by a row of the truth table.
After all, it must make every atomic subformula either true or false.
JOHN: But the reverse is not the case.
If a sentence is not a tautological consequence of another,
then it might still be a logical consequence.
That's because any of the rows in which the premise sentence is true and
the consequence sentence is false might not represent a genuine situation.
There may be good reasons why this row does not represent
a truly logically possible situation.
DAVE: To go along with the notion of tautological consequence,
we developed two additional similar ideas.
One corresponds to the idea of a logical truth.
A logical truth is a sentence that can't possibly be false.
Our propositional logic analogy of this is tautology.
A sentence is a tautology if it's true in every row of it's truth table.
As for consequence, being a tautology is an approximation to being a logical truth.
All tautologies are logical truths.
But some sentences that are not tautologies may still be logical truths.
JOHN: Finally, we introduced the concept of tautological equivalence.
Two sentences are tautologically equivalence if they're
true in the exact same rows of their truth table.
DAVE: With the notion of tautological equivalence in hand,
we were able to show that certain pairs of
sentences in the propositional language are, in fact, equivalent.
That means that our formal language, like natural language,
gives us many different ways of saying
the same thing or at least different ways of expressing the same proposition.
JOHN: That's not a terrible thing.
As we've noted, natural languages give us different ways of saying the same thing.
And we want to retain the possibility that the structure of
the translated sentence matches the structure of the original natural language sentence.
DAVE: One thing that we did notice about our language is that it's redundant,
that is, we don't need all five of the propositional connectives in our language.
Every proposition that can be expressed in
our language can be expressed in a language with fewer connectives.
Propositional equivalences such as
the DeMorgan's laws make it particularly easy to see this.
If we had fewer connectives,
we could still express the same propositions,
but the structure of the FOL sentences may not so
obviously match the structure of their corresponding natural language sentences.
JOHN: Going to the other extreme,
we could imagine adding yet more connectives to
the language to model the structure of natural language sentences more and more closely.
But the resulting language would be unwieldy.
We think that the propositional language that we've
described balances these two concerns pretty well.
DAVE: Speaking of adding new connectives.
The most important result of the propositional part of our course is
that the language that we designed is truth functionally complete.
What this means is that adding any more truth
functional connectives to the language won't increase the expressive power.
We'll still be able to express the same set
of propositions that we can express using our original language,
more conveniently perhaps, but the same set nonetheless.
JOHN: If there are propositions that can't be expressed in our language,
then adding more connectives won't solve that problem.
And adding more truth-functional connectives certainly won't make
tautological consequences any better as an approximation to logical consequence.
We'll need to follow a new course.
[MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
