[MUSIC] DAVE: We turned our attention to the full language of FOL.
This is an extension of the propositional language with new elements called quantifiers.
The quantifiers together with auxiliary elements called variables,
allow us to make claims saying that all objects in the domain have
a particular property or that some object in the domain has a particular property.
JOHN: Now, quantifiers are not truth functional,
meaning that they genuinely extend the expressiveness of our language.
In order to determine the truth of a sentence built using a quantifier,
we must examine the objects that make up the domain of discourse.
DAVE: Being precise about the domain of discourse is another way in
which FOL tightens the conventions of natural language.
In natural language we usually rely on
context to determine the collection of objects under discussion,
but in FOL we're required to spell this out explicitly.
JOHN: Suppose you want to tell whether a first-order sentence
containing quantifiers is always true.
That is, it is a logical truth.
In propositional logic this is relatively simple.
Since the only thing that matters is the truth of the atomic sub formulas,
we can consider all of the possible situations by considering
a complete set of possible combinations of truth values for these atomic sentences.
DAVE: But in full first-order logic,
the situation is much more complex.
Since the number of objects in the domain and
their properties play a role in determining the truth of the sentence,
we have to consider way more situations.
We need to examine all of the domains with one object considering
all possible combinations of the properties and names that that object might have.
Then we have to do the same with domains that contain two objects,
then three, and so on.
JOHN: In fact, we discovered but didn't prove that there's
no procedure for determining whether a sentence of
full first order logic is a logical truth.
That is there's no sequence of instructions that we can
follow that will take a finite amount of time and
which will result in a definite yes or no answer
that the sentence is or is not a logical truth.
DAVE: So although the language of first-order logic allows
us to better approximate the notion of full logical consequence,
that ability comes with a price.
Much more complicated tasks must
be carried out to determine whether a sentence is a truth,
whether two sentences are equivalent or
whether one sentence is a logical consequence of another.
JOHN: When we said that first-order logic is
a good starting point for understanding natural languages,
this is what we were alluding to.
Things only get worse if we attempt to model larger fragments of natural language.
The tasks of determining logical truth and consequence become even more difficult.
DAVE: Like the language of propositional logic,
it turns out that the language of full first-order logic is also redundant.
Although we chose to introduce both the universal
and an existential quantifier, these are inter-definable.
We could choose to have a language with just one of
these quantifiers without losing expressive power.
And also like propositional logic,
there are equivalent pairs of sentences
within the full first-order language which means that
we can express the same propositions
in different ways using the resources of the language.
JOHN: Those are the topics that we've studied in this course but it's worth
spending a few moments to mention some things that we didn't study.
One major topic in first-order logic that we did not
discuss is the development of proof theory.
Proofs provide us with an alternative way of
demonstrating that one sentence is a consequence of others.
DAVE: A proof is a document that shows that
one sentence flows from others by exhibiting a sequence of
steps each of which are obviously
correct inferences which lead from the given information to the conclusion.
JOHN: We cover this topic in detail in our online course,
"Language, Proof and Logic".
So that would be a place to start if you're interested in learning about proofs.
DAVE: We have alluded to the idea that there are other formal languages often extensions of
first-order logic that can model a wider range of natural language sentences.
These include, modal logics which allow us to consider
hypothetical alternative situations as well as the actual one.
Evaluating the truth of a natural language sentence like "Dave is always talking".
requires us not just to consider the actual situation in which I am in fact talking.
It's also necessary to consider a collection of
other past and future situations in which you must look to see if I'm talking.
JOHN: That requires an extension,
both to the language of FOL to provide a way of representing
"always" and a way of describing the semantics of that operator.
Traveling further afield, we might also consider situations in
which information is presented in forms other than sentences.
Perhaps we're given a map of a location or a spreadsheet representing book sales.
These alternative representations are
no different from sentences in the sense that they're
sources of information that can be said to make claims about particular situations.
DAVE: Diagrammatic logic is an area of logic that John and I are both interested in.
Our book, "Reasoning With Diagrams and Sentences",
explores some of these ideas and shows how to build a proof theory which
involves both diagrams and sentences as sources of information.
JOHN: As you can see,
there's much more to explore in the area of logic.
First-order logic is a great place to start your studies.
We hope you've enjoyed this course and will continue in the field
of logic by reading other books and taking more classes.
DAVE: And of course you should complete the final exam for
this course to obtain your credential. I'm Dave.
JOHN: And I'm John. Good bye.
Good bye. [MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
