[MUSIC] JOHN: So the next thing that
we have to do is describe which well-formed formulas are sentences.
That is, expressions that actually make claims about the world.
We've already said that the sentences of
propositional logic will also be sentences of first-order logic,
but we need to have some new ones.
Otherwise, what would be the point?
DAVE: But as we've also said expressions that contain variables are not always sentences.
It is possible to be a well-formed formula,
but not a first-order sentence.
So we have to describe which well-formed formula are also sentences.
JOHN: Earlier, we said that variables are a bit like the word "it."
Sometimes you can use the word "it" and make a perfectly good sentence.
But unless your audience knows how to interpret "it",
then the sentence won't make sense.
In the case of first-order logic,
it's the association between quantifier symbols and
variables that provide this missing information.
The information about how to interpret the variables.
As you might guess, the variable that's written
next to the quantifier is the key to this idea.
DAVE: We need to introduce two new ideas.
The idea is of "free" and "bound" variables.
Intuitively, a variable is bound if we know how to interpret it, and free otherwise.
The rules are fairly intuitive even though they're a bit technical to state.
The first rule is that every variable in an atomic well-formed formula is free.
That's intuitive. There are no quantifiers to
tell us how to interpret any of the variables.
JOHN: The next rules concern the propositional connectives.
Every variable that is free in the formula "P" is
free in the formula "not P" since no new quantifiers have gotten introduced.
The free variables of "P and Q", "P or Q",
"P arrow Q", and "P biconditional Q",
is the set of variables that are free in either "P" or "Q".
These rules say that the propositional connectives
don't affect the set of free variables.
In particular, a variable is free in "P and Q" if it's free in "P" or if it's free in "Q".
DAVE: Now, the rules for quantifiers are the most important.
Basically, the idea is that the variable that follows
the quantifier becomes bound by that quantifier,
and it's no longer free in that quantified sentence.
So the set of variables that are free in for "all x P",
is just the set of variables that are free in "P" with the exception of the variable "x",
the variable that is associated with the quantifier symbol.
JOHN: Before we look at some examples,
we'll just say that any well-formed formula that has no free variables is a "sentence".
That is, such an expression makes a claim about the world.
If there are no free variables,
then we know how to interpret every variable in
the sentence because they're all bound by some quantifier or other,
and we'll come back to this point.
DAVE: So let's look at this example expression in slot number 8,
"for all x Cube(x)".
The rule is that every variable in an atomic well-formed formula is free.
So "x" is a free variable in the atomic wff "Cube(x)".
Indeed it's the only free variable in that expression.
The rules for expressions formed with
the universal quantifier is that the free variables of the quantified expression,
are just those that are free into sub-formula except that
the variable associated with the quantifier is not free in the formula.
So in this case,
the free variable "x" in "Cube(x)" is not free
in "for all x Cube(x)" because it's been bound by the quantifier.
There are no free variables in the larger expression.
Now, that we know that the variable is associated with the universal quantifier,
we can imagine how the sentence might come to mean,
"everything is a cube".
JOHN: The next sentence is similar.
In this case, we can see that "y" is free in the formula "Small(y)",
and in the formula "Cube(y)".
The variables free in the conjunction are just those free in either conjunct,
and so the only free variable in the conjunction is "y".
The existential quantifier has the variable "y" beside it,
and so we know that this quantifier binds "y".
Therefore, no free variables in the entire expression.
It's a sentence. Now, as we'll see,
this sentence means that "there is some small cube".
DAVE: The next sentence is much more complicated.
Looking at the consequent of the implication,
we see that "z" is free in the sub-formula "LeftOf(a, z)",
and that "x" and "z" are both free in the sub-formula "RightOf(x, z)".
This means that the conjunction "LeftOf(a,z)
and RightOf(z,x)"
has both "x" and "z" free,
but the existential quantifier binds "z".
Which means that the quantified formula there "exists z (LeftOf a, z)
and RightOf(z,x)"
has only "x" free in it.
The antecedent to the implication "Dodec(z)" contains the variable ""z free,
and so in this whole formula,
both "x" and "z" are free.
Since there are free variables left when the,
we have computed the variables for the entire expression,
this is not a sentence.
JOHN: We'll leave it to you to work out
the free variables of the component formulas in the next example.
We'll give you the hint that the whole formula is indeed a sentence,
but you should take the time to work out which variables are free in which sub-formulas.
The last sentence, "for all x for all y Likes(x,w)",
has one quantifier immediately inside another.
The formula "Likes(x,w)"
has both "x" and "w" free.
The variable "y" actually doesn't appear in the formula "Likes(x,w)",
so it has no effect on the free variables.
"x" and "w" are both free in "for all y Likes(x,w)",
but the quantifier "for all x" does bind the variable "x".
This means that the only remaining free variable in the final sentence is "w".
DAVE: So this has been a very technical lecture,
but it has a very important outcome.
We've explained how the variables in the sentence get
associated with quantifier symbols which appear elsewhere in the sentence.
This association happens by "binding".
If the variable that is free in an expression,
and that expression is in the scope of a quantifier for that variable,
then the variable is bound by that quantifier.
And this is how we know how to interpret the variables within the expression.
JOHN: We're going to cash in the value of this idea in the next lecture,
when we explain how to work out the truth of
sentences in the full language of first-order logic.
DAVE: In this lecture, we've begun our study of the full language of
first-order logic by introducing the syntax of the expanded language.
JOHN: We introduced both variables and quantifiers,
which work hand in hand to enable us to build sentences of the extended language.
Variables occupy argument positions within the scope of predicate symbols,
and quantifiers and an associated variable prefix an expression to create a larger one.
DAVE: Since quantifiers tell us how to interpret the variables within their scope,
we want to ensure that every variable has an associated quantifier.
If it doesn't, then the sentence doesn't make a claim about
the world because we don't know how to understand that variable.
JOHN: Variables that are governed by a corresponding quantifier are called bound variables,
while those that are not are called free.
A well-formed expression which has
no free variables is a sentence and it makes a claim about the world.
DAVE: While we haven't given a formal semantics of these sentences yet,
we have probably said enough to give you an idea of how this is going to work.
In the next video, we'll make this completely precise.
We'll give formal rules for determining
the truth value of a sentence that involve quantifiers,
and therefore allow us to say which sentences are true,
and which are false in a particular situation.
JOHN: So please join us for that lecture.
DAVE: Until then. [MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
