[MUSIC] JOHN: Hi my name is John Etchemendy,
and I have the property of being one of the instructors of this course.
DAVE: I have a different name,
it's Dave Barker-Plummer but I
too have the property of being an instructor for this course.
In this lecture we're going to introduce some of
the basic building blocks of the language of first-order logic.
By the end of this lecture,
you will know how to build the simplest sentences of first-order logic.
JOHN: We call these sentences "atomic sentences",
because like atoms they form the basic components of larger structures.
As we've said, the sentences of first-order logic make claims about the world.
They're sentences which can be either true or false.
Now atomic sentences are
the smallest structures of our language which have this property.
DAVE: So as you'll see, will be very precise in designing our language.
One of the most important features of the language of first-order logic,
is that the sentences you build must all be completely unambiguous.
JOHN: Now like real atoms,
atomic sentences are actually made up of smaller pieces.
But none of the pieces on their own can be used to make a claim about the world.
Only atomic sentences make claims.
DAVE: We're going to begin the development of our language of
first-order logic by considering these basic elements of the language.
There are three elements that we're going to focus on right away;
"names", "properties", and "relations".
JOHN: Now, names serve a very basic function in the language.
That is, they pick out objects in the world to focus our attention on the objects,
and to make claims about them.
One kind of claim involves saying that
say a particular object has some property or other.
I might say, for example,
that "Dave is tall" or that "Dave is a logician".
DAVE: At least one of these sentences is false.
Now these sentences share the same form.
They pick out an object in the world, namely me,
and make a claim that I have a certain property,
that I'm tall or that I'm a logician respectively.
Other sentences express facts that certain relations hold between objects.
For example the sentence;
"John is taller than Dave",
picks out two objects from the world,
and makes a claim that relates those two objects to one another.
JOHN: Relations may involve more than two objects.
The sentence; "New York is between Boston and Washington DC",
picks out three objects from the world, cities in this case,
and asserts that some spatial relationship holds between them.
DAVE: In most natural languages like English,
there are a variety of ways of saying the same thing.
For example, I might say;
"Susan gave the ball to Mary".
Or instead, I might say;
"Mary was given the ball by Susan".
In yet another formulation I might say;
"The ball was given to Mary by Susan".
JOHN: Now, in a sense all of these sentences mean exactly the same thing.
They describe the same fact.
If one of these sentences were true,
then the others would have to be true too,
since they all have the same factual content.
But there are good reasons why we would choose to use the different sentences.
For example, I might want to draw attention to the ball rather than Mary.
I might choose one formulation in preference to the
other depending on who I want to focus on.
DAVE: In logic, we'll be concerned only with the statement that a sentence makes.
We view sentences as conveying particular propositional information.
That is, a sentence conveys a proposition, a claim that could be true.
Any other features of the sentence such as the focus of the conversation is on Mary,
or it is spoken in an excited tone of voice, for example,
are not part of our concern.
JOHN: We're going to reduce the variability of expressions in
our formal language by choosing
a particular standard representation for simple propositions.
We view each proposition as a relationship that holds between a collection of objects.
DAVE: We want to be very strict in designing our language.
We want there to be no ambiguity about what the sentences of first-order logic mean.
This requires spelling out at least three things very carefully.
The first, is the relationship between names used in the sentence,
and the objects in the world that they refer to.
The second, is exactly what property is named by the words in the sentence.
For example, what exactly do we mean by "tall"?
What counts as tall?
The third, is exactly how the objects mentioned are related by the property.
Is it that Dave is taller than John or vice versa?
JOHN: So we're going to consider each of these three issues in turn.
But before we do that,
we're going to introduce you to Tarski's World.
The program that you'll be using to learn the language of first-order logic.
[MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
