[MUSIC] JOHN: The most obvious thing about the
Tarski's World program is that it depicts objects on a checkerboard floating in space.
DAVE: Now, this is a regular eight by eight checkerboard.
JOHN: Except it's floating in space.
DAVE: The blocks that can be found on the checkerboard are one of three kinds.
They are cubes which are colored blue green,
tetrahedra or pyramids that are kind of this kind of bright pink color,
and dodecahedra which are yellow objects with 12 sides.
JOHN: Each object is one of three sizes;
small like this tetrahedron and this cube,
medium-sized like these cubes and these tetrahedra,
or large like this tetrahedron back in the back.
DAVE: Every object can be found on a square of the board.
Squares are not large enough to contain two objects
and indeed large objects are so large you can't put another object next to them.
JOHN: We call configurations of the blocks on the checkerboard, "worlds."
Worlds are very simple.
We choose to make them this simple because we want to provide an easy to
understand set of situations that we
can talk about using the sentences of first order logic.
Nonetheless, the situations are actually complicated enough so that we can
discuss the whole range of logically interesting ideas using just these worlds.
DAVE: We'll shortly introduce our first-order language for talking about blocks worlds.
But before we do,
think about the range of things that you could say about these worlds;
we can talk about the size of particular blocks,
that "d" is medium-sized for example,
we can talk about relative sizes using words like "larger" and "smaller",
and relative positions using ideas like "to the left of" or "behind".
All of these properties and relationships form part of
the vocabulary that we use in the first order language that we use in Tarski's World.
Tarski's World allows you to draw pictures of worlds like this,
and write sentences in the language of first order logic.
One of the important things that you'll learn is how to
determine whether a sentence is true in a particular world.
When we ask you to solve some exercises using Tarski's World,
we may ask you to build a world which makes a set of sentences all true.
One of the things you'll need to do then is to know how to create and edit worlds.
JOHN: So let's start by creating a new world.
You do that by using the New>New World command from the File menu.
When you do that, you'll see, uh,
new tab with an empty world that contains no blocks.
DAVE: To create new blocks,
click on the "New Block" button on the toolbar.
It has a collection of shapes with a downward pointing arrow.
Let's create four new blocks by clicking on the button four times.
Now, what you'll see here depends on your preference settings,
but by default, Tarski's World creates a block of random size and shape.
We've set it up to create small cubes.
JOHN: To move an object to a new position, you just drag it.
Click down on the object and move it to its new position and let go.
Be careful though because if you drag it off the board it's going to be deleted.
DAVE: You can select an object by clicking on it.
Objects change color to indicate that they're selected.
You can change the shape of the selected object using the shape buttons in the toolbar,
there is one for each of the shapes.
The small, medium and large buttons,
are used to change the size of the selected object.
Then they're used in exactly the same way;
large, medium and small.
JOHN: There are two other operations that you can do
to the world to help you see what's going on.
These two arrows allow you to rotate the world either clockwise or counterclockwise.
And this button here allows you to move into
2D mode which lets you see the world from above.
[MUSIC]
