[MUSIC] DAVE: Objects in Tarski's World can have names.
In this world, this cube is named "a" and the small tetrahedron in the back is named "b".
This tetrahedron at the front has two names;
"d" and "c". You give an object a name by selecting it,
and then using one of the name buttons from the toolbar.
This name buttons are labeled "a" through "f".
JOHN: Names are used in language to pick out objects from the world.
Now, Tarski's World makes it very obvious how names work.
You assign a name to an object by using the editing controls just as Dave explained,
the block is henceforth required to wear one of those
awful name tags that people sometimes have to wear at social events.
DAVE: In FOL, we will adopt the convention that names are words which begin with
a lowercase letter from the beginning of
the alphabet, up to and including the letter "s", to be precise.
You'll use only the names "a" through "f" in the Tarski's World application though.
We have to make clear precise conventions like
this to enable us to decide which sequence of
symbols are legal sentences of FOL.
These conventions is similar to the rules of grammar in English, but more precise.
Similar in the sense that they serve the same function.
But notice that our convention for names, that they begin with
lowercase letters in FOL, is the reverse of the convention in English.
In English, we require that proper names are capitalized.
There are other differences between English and FOL too,
and we're going to take a little while to think about these.
One of the skills that you will learn in this class is how to
translate English sentences into FOL and vice versa.
Understanding how various parts of FOL relate to
their natural language counterparts is critical to allow you to do this.
JOHN: So names in logic are governed by some simple rules.
First, not all objects have names.
This is exactly like the situation in natural language.
Only very special objects have names; people,
pets, cities, places more generally.
But most objects actually don't have names.
It's pretty unusual to give names to tables and chairs and
almost unheard of to give names to the oxygen molecules in a room, for example.
DAVE: Now, some objects can have more than one name there's an example in
this world where this tetrahedron is named both "d" and "c". Again,
this is like natural language.
Think of Superman and Clark Kent.
Or, Mark Twain, and Samuel Clemens,
or JK Rowling, and Robert Galbraith, for example.
JOHN: There's a slight difference between
natural language and these examples of pseudonyms though.
By convention in English,
we think of one of these names as the real name of the person,
and others as alternatives.
The real name is usually one that is legally recognized in some way.
In FOL though, all the names have equal standing.
There's one thing that we don't allow in
FOL which is slightly different from natural languages.
And that is that we insist that each name refers to exactly one object.
That is, we cannot have a world in which two blocks both have the name "a", for example.
DAVE: And indeed the Tarski's World program will
prevent you from getting into such a situation.
It's pretty easy to see why we want to have this rule.
When I say that "a is a cube",
we want this to be a completely unambiguous claim,
and part of what we need to make it unambiguous is
the ability to pick out the unique object- object in the world that "a" refers to.
If we can't do that,
we don't have much of a chance of deciding whether the sentence is true.
JOHN: Now, this is actually a little different from natural languages.
In fact, it's a lot different.
There are many people in the world called Dave,
for example, and even more called John.
A sentence like "Dave is taller than John" is ambiguous because,
it may be referring to any of these various Dave's and John's.
In general though, we have a variety of mechanisms in natural language that
allow us to make sure that we know who or what we're talking about in a particular use.
We use the context, for example.
So we know that Dave in this context probably refers to
Dave Barker-Plummer right now because he's sitting right next to me.
And besides, he's the only person that
is named Dave that we all know to be in this context.
We use family names sometimes as a way of specifying which John we're referring to.
And sometimes we can use descriptions like John from Stanford, for example.
DAVE: This is really the only way that the use of names in
first-order logic differs from normal usage in English.
We have to specify before we interpret any sentences, which name refers to which object.
When we're using the Tarski's World application,
we do this using the name controls to attach names to blocks.
JOHN: Next, we have to think about making claims about objects in the world.
To do that, we need a notion of properties and relations.
And this will be our next topic.
[MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
