DAVE: If I'm Dave, then this is John.
JOHN: And he's Dave.
DAVE: In the last lecture, we discussed the Boolean connectives,
conjunction, disjunction, and negation.
In this lecture, we'll complete our collection of
propositional connectives by introducing the conditionals.
JOHN: The "material conditional" corresponds to the English expression,
"if...then..." in many cases.
And of course, there are other English expressions which will
also translate into the conditional connective.
The other conditional connective that we'll introduce is the "material biconditional".
It's a little rarer in English.
It's most often used by mathematicians and
logicians who are trying to be very precise with language.
DAVE: Our second main goal in this lecture is to introduce
another way to think about the semantics of propositional connectives.
The method involves a turn-taking game which asks you
to say whether you believe that a sentence is true or false.
And then reveals the beliefs that you must have
about the truth of the component sentences.
Now, whether you think about the semantics of the sentences by using the game,
or by using truth tables,
you'll get the same results.
For now, having two methods for thinking about the semantics just
provides some variety and two different perspectives on the same idea.
JOHN: Now, the real payoff for the game will
become apparent when we move to full first-order logic.
In the second half of the course,
we'll introduce "quantifiers" which are not truth functional.
Consequently, the method of truth tables can't be used for sentences using quantifiers.
But fortunately, the game semantics does
generalize to the full language of first order logic.
DAVE: Okay, to work. We're going to study the conditional connectives in this lecture.
These connectives weren't studied by Boole,
but they are part of the standard language of first order logic.
Likes the Boolean connectives,
the conditional connectives are truth functional and we'll
describe their meanings at first using truth tables.
JOHN: The first connective that we'll discuss is the material conditional.
The main idea behind this connective is to
capture the meaning of sentences involving "if-then".
As we'll see this is actually quite tricky,
and we'll have to make some stipulations about the particular kind
of if-then claims that we can translate into FOL.
DAVE: Right. One of the things that we typically expect of the use of
conditional statements in natural language is that the parts of the statement have,
or might have, some kind of connection to one another.
For example, the sentence "If Quinn is at the library,
then he's studying for his exam" sounds just fine.
But the sentence "If Quinn is at the library,
then two plus two equals four" seems strange at best.
JOHN: And this intuition is probably right,
but it indicates that this particular use of
the phrase if-then can't be truth-functional.
The idea that the components sentences have to be connected in
some way is something that truth functionality can't take into account.
And this is not so unusual.
There are plenty of connectives in English that are not truth-functional.
A really good example is the word "because".
"Because" is a connective.
It connects sentences together such as
"Dave is upset because he received a parking ticket".
But imagine a situation in which these things are true.
"Dave is upset", "Dave received a parking ticket",
"Dave is upset because he received a parking ticket". "John is happy".
DAVE: Now, think about the sentence.
"Dave is upset because he received a parking ticket".
Both component sentences of this "because" statement are true.
And we know that the "because" statement is also true.
So if "because" were truth-functional,
that would mean that any of the sentence is of the form
"P because Q" is true when both "P" and "Q" are.
But that means that in this situation the sentence "John is happy because
Dave received a parking ticket" is also true
because statements are true when both components sentences are true in this theory.
But this isn't necessarily right,
perhaps John is sympathetic to Dave.
But in fact, he's just won
the lottery and that's what accounts for the fact that he's happy.
Some "because" statements are true when both components are true and others are not.
And this means that no truth functional theory
or logic can account for the connective "because".
JOHN: "If-then" is a little different from "because" some English uses of "if-then" are
not truth functional because we expect there to be
a relevant connection between the two component sentences.
Other uses though are truth-functional,
or we can treat them as if they are without too much trouble.
These are the cases when we read a conditional statement "if P then Q" as meaning.
"If P is true then Q is also true",
with no idea of causality or connection between "P" and "Q".
DAVE: And that's why we call this the material conditional.
There are many forms of conditional statements in English,
or in natural languages more generally.
And this is the only use that can be explained truth-functionally.
We use the symbol "arrow" written between
two FOL sentences to indicate the material conditional.
We call the formula to the left of the arrow,
the "antecedent" of the formula,
and the formula to the right,
the "consequent" of the conditional.
In this sentence "P implies Q",
"P" is the antecedent and "Q" is the consequent.
Let's think about the truth table for this connective.
JOHN: Well, about the only thing that is pretty obvious about this truth table,
is that in a situation where "P" is true and "Q" is false,
the implication "P arrow Q" had better be false.
Since the sentence "P arrow Q" is intended to mean if "P" is true then "Q" is also true,
then it's obviously false in a situation in which "P" is true and "Q" is false.
DAVE: What about the situation in which both "P" and "Q" are true?
Well, in this case,
we expect the formula "P arrow Q" to be true too.
This sentence says that if "P" is true then "Q" is true.
P is true in this row and Q is true too.
So the sentence says something true.
JOHN: What should we do when the antecedent is false?
If someone says that if "P" is true then "Q" is true too,
and then we look and we see that "P" is false.
what would we say about what this person said?
Would we say that this person told the truth?
Well, they didn't say anything obviously false.
So in fact, they didn't say anything that applies to the situation that we're in at all.
DAVE: And would be pretty mean to say that they lied.
JOHN: Right. So in these two rows we're going to say that the conditional sentence is true.
Notice that if we had decided to write false in both of these rows then
we'd be saying that the meaning of the
conditional is the same as that of the conjunction,
which we know is obviously not right.
DAVE: Our truth-functional account of conditional then has
only one way in which a conditional statement can be false.
And that's when the antecedent is true but the consequent is false.
Notice that this means that the sentence "P arrow Q", "if P then Q",
is equivalent to the sentence "not P or Q".
The implication is true just when either the antecedent "P" is false,
that is if "not P" is true,
or if the consequent "Q" is true.
DAVE: Like "P arrow Q" the only way "not P or Q" can be false is if both "not P" and "Q" are false.
That is if "P" is true and "Q" is false.
JOHN: We described this connective as being a way of translating if-then statements.
But there are lots of other ways to make conditional claims in English.
For example, we might say,
"if Dave has a parking ticket then he's upset".
"Dave is upset if he has a parking ticket".
"Dave has a parking ticket only if he's upset".
"Provided Dave has a parking ticket he's upset."
DAVE: These are all forms of the conditional expressed in English.
And as we observed before about the other connectives,
even though these sentences have the same propositional content,
we might use them in different circumstances for pragmatic reasons.
One thing to notice about the two forms here where the
conditional is written between the compound sentences.
When I say, "Dave is upset if he has a parking ticket",
notice that the "if" precedes the antecedent of the claim.
If we use this kind of infix "if" the consequent comes first,
and the antecedent second.
The word "if" here introduces what we call a sufficient condition.
If I say that "you'll pass this course if you turn in the homework",
I'm saying that all you need to do to pass the course is to turn in the homework.
Or another way of putting that is that
turning in the homework is sufficient to pass the course.
Now, this is a very weak statement.
If it were true you wouldn't have to pass the exams,
you wouldn't have to really do well on the homework,
and all you'd have to do is turn something in.
DAVE: On the other hand, when we say "only if"
the antecedent comes first and the consequence second.
If I say "you will pass the course only if you turn in the homework",
then we're saying that turning in the homework is a necessary condition.
You have to turn in the homework to pass the course if you don't, you won't pass.
But even then you may have to do well on the homework and the exams too.
The only thing that this statement really says is that if you
don't turn in your homework you definitely won't pass.
JOHN: There's one more common use of conditional statements in English.
And these are statements that use the word "unless".
So if I say that" Max is at the library unless Claire is at home",
what I'm saying is that I know that Max is at the Library if Claire is not at home.
This is just the implication.
"If Claire's not at home,
then Max is at the library".
Or alternatively, Max is at the library if Claire is not at home.
We translate the sentence "P unless Q" as "not Q
arrow P". Notice what this sentence says when Claire is at home.
If Claire is at home, then maybe Max is at the library or maybe he's not.
Either way the sentence is true. [MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
