[MUSIC] JOHN: The last propositional
connective in our language is the biconditional connective.
We use the double-headed arrow symbol,
the arrow that points both ways, for this connective
DAVE: Now the use of this symbol is suggestive.
It looks like a conditional arrow but going in both directions,
and that is indeed what it means.
When we write "P double arrow Q",
we are saying both "if P then Q" and "if Q then
P". We often say that "P is true if and only if Q".
Or that "P is true just in case Q is true".
JOHN: What does a truth table for this biconditional look like?
The easiest way to think about this connective is that it says that
the two component statements have the same truth value.
A biconditional sentence "P if and only if Q" or "P double arrow Q" is
true provided either both "P" and "Q" are true or "P" and "Q" are both false.
What about the close relationship with conditional?
Well, another way to think of this is saying both "P implies Q" and "Q
implies P". In the rows in which the sentences have different truth values,
then one of these implications is false because one of them has the antecedent
true and the consequent false. Since one of the implications is guaranteed to be false,
so is the conjunction of the implications and
so in rows where the "P" and "Q" have different truth values,
then the biconditional sentence is false.
In the row where both sentences are true,
then both implications are true.
Remember implications are true in rows in which the antecedent and consequent are both true.
JOHN: Now, we're going to return to the close relationship between the material
conditional and the material biconditional later on in the course.
DAVE: Now, biconditional is an interesting connective in
English because we rarely use it explicitly.
In fact, mathematicians and logicians are
about the only people who are careful about their use.
In everyday English, we almost always use a conditional expression like "if then",
even when we intend to say the stronger claim that these two claims are equivalent
and we rely on context to let people understand that the biconditional is intended.
JOHN: For example, I might say,
"If you eat your spinach,
then you can have ice cream for dessert."
But then I might get the reply,
"that means I can have dessert even if I don't eat my spinach".
After all, conditional sentences are true when the antecedent is false.
DAVE: Right. What you really need to say at least if you're talking to
a logical kid is that "you can have ice cream if and only if you eat spinach".
That is, if you eat your spinach,
you can have ice cream,
and if you don't eat the dreaded spinach,
then you can't have ice cream.
JOHN: There's one more symbol on
the logic panel in Tarski's World that you'll sometimes need to use.
This is the symbol that looks like an upside down capital T. People sometimes
refer to this symbol as "bottom" or in logic it's sometimes more useful to say "falsum".
This symbol is a special atomic formula,
a formula that's always false.
We wouldn't have much occasion to use it in
the class but we will mention it a few times later.
JOHN: Well. That's all of the symbols on the first row of the logic panel in Tarski's World.
These are the truth functional connectives,
and the language that we have just described is called propositional logic.
Propositional logic is a sub-language of first-order logic.
That is, we're going to add yet more to the language
before we complete the study of first-order logic.
DAVE: But we're going to pause here for a while and investigate
some properties of this smaller language before we go further.
But before we do that though,
let's look at writing and evaluating conditional statements using
Tarski's World and look at another way of thinking
about the semantics of first-order sentences.
[MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
