JOHN: We've now completed learning the set of propositional connectives in our language.
We have the three Boolean connectives,
"and", "or", and "not",
together with the conditional connectives "material implication" and "biconditional".
DAVE: Now you enter conditional and biconditional formulas
using the toolbar buttons in exactly the way that you would expect.
You enter the first formula,
hit the button for the connective and then enter the second formula
JOHN: You need to surround a conditional and biconditional sentences in
parentheses if you're going to then use them within other sentences,
even if those sentences are of the same type.
The sentence "P biconditional Q
biconditional R" is not well formed and neither is "if P then Q then R".
DAVE: So let's add to our collection of sentences in this file,
the one that we made last time.
Create a new sentence slot,
and enter the sentence,
"Cube(a) implies Dodec(f)". Notice that in this world,
both the antecedent and consequent are true and so this implication evaluates as true.
JOHN: Suppose that we want to say that this conditional sentence implies that "d is a cube".
We need to enter "parenthesis,
Cube(a) arrow Dodec(f),
end of parentheses, arrow,
Cube(d)". Surrounding the implication which is now the antecedent with
parentheses allows us to make sure that that sentence is not ambiguous.
DAVE: This sentence is false.
Since the antecedent implication is true as we just saw,
but the consequent is false.
JOHN: Let's quickly illustrate the use of biconditionals by entering the formula
"Smaller(b,a) if and only if FrontOf(a, b)".
In this world, both component sentences are true and
so this sentence should also be true.
DAVE: We want to spend the rest of this video describing
another way to think about the semantics of propositional logic,
An alternative method to
the truth table method that we use to describe the meaning of the connectives.
It's always good to have alternative ways of thinking about the same issue.
So we want you to know about this new way which we call, "game semantics".
JOHN: It's particularly important to know about game semantics
once we get to the context of full first order logic,
the truth table method actually applies pretty well in propositional logic,
and we don't need game semantics for the propositional part of logic.
We'll not be able to use truth tables, however,
for some of the new ways of building sentences that we'll get to later,
what we call "quantifiers".
So game semantics can be used throughout the whole of
first-order logic but it also works in propositional logic.
DAVE: The idea behind games semantics is that one of
the players has a certain belief about the truth value of the sentence.
Suppose for example, that I believe that sentence seven in this file "Tet(a),
and the disjunction Dodec(f),
or LeftOf(c, a)", is false.
Now this sentence is a conjunction.
So since I believe that it's false,
John might ask me to justify my belief.
He would say-
JOHN: Well Dave, since you believe this conjunction is false,
you must believe that one or the other of the conjuncts is false.
Because if you don't believe that one of
them is false and you believe them both to be true,
and then you would believe that the conjunction is true.
So Dave, which conjunct do you think is false?
DAVE: Then I would reply, you're right John,
I do believe that one of the conjuncts is false.
Specifically, I believe that "Tet(a)" is false.
JOHN: To which I would reply, well Dave,
you were correct "Tet(a)" is indeed false in this world,
because we can see that "a" is a cube. Well done.
DAVE: Thank you John. Now, it's very
inconvenient to have to wait for John to be available to play the game with you,
so we have enabled the Tarski's World program to play the game too.
When you focus on sentence seven,
and hit the "Play Game" button on the toolbar,
just to the right of the evaluation buttons,
Tarski's World is ready to play.
JOHN: So you'll notice that the first thing that Tarski's World
does is to ask what you believe about the truth value of the main sentence.
Remember, Dave believes that it's false,
and so that's what we say.
DAVE: The first thing we see is Tarski's World confirming what we said.
So you believe that this sentence is false. We say Okay.
Now Tarski's World is telling us an additional commitment that we now have.
We must believe that one of these two conjunct sentences are false.
Either "Tet(a)" is false or "Dodec(f) or LeftOf(c,a)".
Again, we agree.
JOHN: So now, we get to choose which of these sentences we think is false.
Remember that's what I made Dave do.
If we choose "Tet(a)",
then Tarski's World will confirm our choice and
then we'll immediately win the game as before,
since we are indeed correct.
DAVE: So we can use this "Reconsider" button to
investigate what would've happened if we'd make the other choice of conjunct.
We might believe that the conjunction is false,
because the formula "Dode(f) or LeftOf(c,a)" is false.
Let's see what happens.
JOHN: Okay. Again, Tarski's World confirms the choice.
Before we take the next step,
let's see if we can work out what will happen next.
We've said that we believe that this disjunction is false.
That means that we believe that both of the disjuncts are false.
If Tarski's World can pick a disjunct that is true,
then it will have proved us wrong.
DAVE: That's what will happen. Tarski's will points out the
we're committed to believing that both disjuncts are false,
and then Tarski's well chooses the formula "LeftOf(c,a)",
and tries to hold us to the commitment that this formula is false.
We immediately lose because this formula is true and not false in the world.
JOHN: If you're playing along at home,
the game might not have gone exactly the same way for
you because Tarski's World might have picked the other disjunct
"Dodec(f)". This formula too is false in a world
and Tarski's world knows that it will win if it picks this formula too.
If there are many ways for Tarski's World to win,
then it will pick one of those ways randomly.
DAVE: So notice, in this particular play of the game,
we were correct in our original judgment that the sentence is false.
The first time we played,
we picked the right path and we won the game.
If our original belief is correct,
there is always a way to win but you have to play correctly.
If you make the wrong choice,
you can lose even if your original belief was correct.
You can still say that you believe something that isn't so.
On the other hand, if you're incorrect in your initial assessment of the formula,
there is no way that you can win.
Tarski's World will beat you every time.
JOHN: That's because it never makes any mistakes.
So we know that it's not exactly World of Warcraft,
but it is a game and it can be helpful in getting
straight about the meaning of the first-order formulas.
So when you're doing an exercise and you find that
Tarski's World is saying that the sentence has
a truth value that you really didn't expect,
then that's a good time to play the game,
just to see where you were going wrong.
DAVE: Suppose that we start this game over,
and this time we say that we believe that the sentence is true.
Remember that it is in fact false in this world.
Notice that as soon as we confirm our belief,
Tarski's World says that we must believe both of the conjuncts are true.
We believe that the conjunction is true,
we must therefore believe that both of the conjuncts are true.
Unlike in the original play of the game,
Tarski's World will pick a conjunct this time.
It will try to pick a false conjunct to prove that we're wrong.
JOHN: We already know that this is possible.
Tarski's World can pick the conjunct "Tet(a)",
which is definitely false in the world.
And, of course, we lose.
DAVE: We've just looked at some examples of the game in different situations.
Let's investigate now exactly what all of the rules of the game are.
As we've seen, the rules of the game depend on the main connective of the formula,
and what you believe about the truth of that formula.
Given those two things,
either you or the program will make a choice of a new commitment for the next play.
We can summarize this in a table.
JOHN: So the first case is that the formula is a disjunction and you believe that it's true.
In this case, you will play and you'll have to choose some disjunct that's true.
That's because for the disjunction to be true,
one of the disjuncts has to be true and you have to pick it.
DAVE: On the other hand, if you believe that the disjunction is false,
then you believe that all of the disjuncts are false,
and so it would be Tarski's World's job to
try to pick some true disjunct to prove you wrong.
JON: Now, the case of a conjunction is just the reverse.
If you believe that a conjunction is true,
then you must believe that all of the conjuncts are true.
In that case, Tarski's World just has to pick
a single false conj- conjunct to prove you wrong,
so it's Tarski's World's turn.
If on the other hand you believe that a conjunction is false,
then all you have to do is choose some false conjunct to show that you're right,
and Tarski's World will give you the opportunity to do that.
DAVE: And the rule for negation is very simple.
Whatever you believe about the formula,
you must believe the reverse about the negated part.
If you believe "not P" is true,
then you believe that "P" is false and vice versa.
There's no choice to be made.
Just remove the negation symbol and switch belief,
and Tarski's World will do that automatically for you.
JOHN: So that's the Boolean connectives covered.
The case of the conditional connectives is similar.
We know that the formula "P arrow Q",
if P then Q is equivalent to the formula "not P or Q".
When you're playing the game and you come across an implication,
an "if-then" statement,
it's replaced by the disjunction form,
and then the commitment stays the same because the sentences are equivalent.
And if you believe one,
you have to believe the other.
DAVE: Similarly, the formula "P biconditional Q",
P double arrow Q is equivalent to the conjunction of "P arrow Q",
and "Q arrow P". When you encounter a formula like this,
Tarski's World will substitute the longer formula and keep the same commitment.
JOHN: So now we've covered the rules for all of the connectives.
In the case of conjunction and disjunction,
there are choices to be made, sometimes by you and sometimes by Tarski's World.
In all of the other cases, there is no choice,
you just replace the formula by
a different one and either switch the commitment in the case of negation,
or keep it the same in the case of the two conditionals.
DAVE: Once again, you can get the game rules tattooed on your body for
handy reference or carry a card with you at all times.
But in fact, the rules follow directly from the semantics of the connectives,
and you should be able to reconstruct them from
first principles if you think about what it
means to prove that a formula of each kind has the appropriate truth values.
JOHN: In this lecture, we've completed the set of
connectives in the language of propositional logic,
the truth functional part of first-order logic
ADVE: Right. We introduced both the material conditional and the material biconditional
connectives which corresponds to approximately two conditional statements using "if then",
and "if and only if" in English.
We saw how this correspondence only works for some kinds of conditional statements,
and so we have to be sensitive to the kind of
English conditional being used before we translate into FOL.
JOHN: We also threw in an extra bonus connective, Falsum.
It has a really uninteresting truth table and we rarely have cause to use it.
It's used to represent a sentence which is always false
DAVE: The other main point of this lecture was
the introduction of the game semantics for first-order logic.
If we believe that the sentence has a particular truth value,
then we must also have certain beliefs about the component sentences.
For example, if we believe that a conjunction is true,
then we must believe that all of the conjuncts are true.
JOHN: Now this observation gives rise to game semantics by
taking a commitment or belief about a complex statement,
and decomposing that belief into beliefs about the smaller component sentences.
Even if we're unsure about the truth value of the large sentence,
eventually we'll decompose the sentence into components that are small enough,
that we'll be able to immediately see our commitments to
those sentences are correct or possibly mistaken.
DAVE: We recommend that you use Tarski's World extensively to make sure that you fully
understand the semantics of the connectives and exactly how the game works.
In the next lecture, we'll be putting our language to work and defining
some important concepts that our language now enables us to capture precisely.
JOHN: These include the notions of logical truth, and logical consequence.
A sentence is a logical truth if there's
no logically possible way that it can ever be false.
And one sentence is a logical consequence of another if
it's truth is guaranteed by the truth of the other sentence.
So until then, bye bye.
[MUSIC]
