In this video,
you'll learn how to provide default
values for arguments, or specify their names
in a function call. Let's start with the question. What will be printed here? The 'joinToString' function joins the contents of a string
in the desired way. You can specify a separator,
prefix and postfix. The output should be
quite straightforward. We simply join the content
of the list by using an empty string
as a separator, and surrounding it by the specified prefix
and postfix: the parentheses. You can specify the names of
the arguments directly in the code. That often makes
the invocation more readable. It's easier to understand what
the arguments are supposed to do, especially for arguments of basic types
such as Int, Boolean, or String. Named arguments are often used
together with default arguments. For 'joinToString', you can provide only the value for one of the arguments, for instance, 'postfix’. Looking at the output, we can understand that the
default separator is comma, and an empty string is
used by default as 'prefix'. You don't have to
specify the values for all arguments each time. You can change the defaults,
only if needed. Let's see how you can declare a function with default
values for arguments. Here, the function
'displaySeparator' prints a character by
a given number of times. We use star as 'character' by default, and 10 as the default
number of times. Afterward, you can call this function
with different arguments values. For each argument with the default value, you can either provide another value
or use a default one. However, note that if you need to provide only the value
for the second argument, then you have to use
named arguments syntax. By default, there is the
direct correspondence between unnamed arguments and parameters according to their order. The next question to you is: What is printed in this case? The options are five three's, three five's, or the code you want to compile. What do you think? The right answer is, the code you want to compile. As I've told you, there is
the direct correspondence between unnamed arguments and parameters. This code doesn't compile, because you can't pass Int
constant whenever Char is expected. Similarly, you can't use character argument
as Int parameter. In Kotlin, there are
no implicit conversions. You can't implicitly convert an integer to a
character or vice versa. You have to explicitly
call 'toInt' or 'toChar' functions
for such conversions. If you pass
the arguments by name, you can change
their order easily. In this case, we
get what we expect. It prints character
'5' by three times. In Java, if you want to
achieve the same behavior, you will use the
overloaded functions. To provide the functionality
of default arguments, you will define
several different overloads, and call one inside another
by specifying default values. In Kotlin, you use the default
arguments feature directly. You no longer need to
provide several overloads. But there is
an interesting question. How to call a function with
default arguments from Java? When you call a Kotlin function with default arguments from Java, you have to specify the values
for all the arguments. That happens to
minimize the number of functions which are
generated under the hood. By default, Kotlin generates
the function with all the argument, and only one additional
auxiliary function containing information about
all the default values, which you can't call from Java. If you want to call
the Kotlin function with default arguments from
Java in a convenient way, then you can add
'@JvmOverloads' annotation. After you annotate
the function with default argument
with @JvmOverloads, you can specify only some of the arguments when you
call it from Java. The next question is not
about @JvmOverloads annotation, but it will help later to understand how exactly it works. The 'sum' function has
three arguments here. You can either specify each argument value
or omit it and use the default value. How many argument
combinations are possible when you call
this function from Kotlin? The first combination is specifying only
the first argument. The second one is specifying
only the second argument. The third one is
specifying both the first, and the second argument, and so on. The answer is eight, which is two to
the power of three. In a general case, if we try to cover
all the argument combinations, it will be too many functions. Two to the power of the number of arguments with default
values might be too many. That's not how @JvmOverloads
annotation works. @JvmOverloads annotation generates, in this case,
only four functions. The one for each new argument with a default value. Note that if you don't use the function with default
arguments from Java, there is no need to add
the JvmOverloads annotation. Even if you use it
occasionally from Java but you want to have only one function
for performance reasons, you might want to leave
it without annotation, and to specify the argument
values explicitly in Java. That's your choice. We've discussed the syntax for named and
default arguments in Kotlin. You saw a useful
'joinToString' function that allows you to print list contents in the desired way. Also, we've discuss how to make usage of a function with default arguments, convenient from Java. This completes our discussion about functions and variables. Next, we're going to focus
on control structures.