[MUSIC] JOHN: Reecall that when we describe the semantics of propositional logic.
We use two methods.
The first was to give a semantics based on
truth tables and the second was to develop a game in Tarski's World,
which would help to explain the semantics of sentences.
DAVE: Now, because the first-order quantifiers are not truth-functional,
we don't have the option of using truth tables semantics.
A truth table is just a way of describing a truth-functional connective,
and quantifiers don't work that way.
But the good news is that
the Henkin-Hintikka game can be extended to first order logic.
And we're going to describe how in this video.
JOHN: I'm sure that you remember that the game is played by making a commitment to the truth of
a formula and then being challenged by
your opponent to justify your belief in that commitment,
in terms of commitments about subformulas.
The game is extended to FOL by adding
new rules to the game that apply to the quantified formula.
The propositional game rules still remain the same as they were before.
DAVE: So, John, if I told you that I believe that a universally quantified formula is true,
what would you challenge me to do?
JOHN: Well, since you believe that a universally quantified formula is true,
then you believe that all of the objects in
the domain satisfy its immediate subformula.
I guess that I tried to select an object from the domain
that I believe does not satisfy the formula.
DAVE: Exactly. Suppose I believe that the universal formula that
says "everything is large," you could prove me wrong by
selecting a small or medium-sized object and challenging me
to show that the subformula is satisfied by that object.
If you can pick such an object,
then obviously my belief is wrong and you would have demonstrated my bone headedness.
If you can't pick such an object, then perhaps I'm right.
JOHN: That's the basic idea of the game rules for quantifiers.
A belief in the truth or falsity of a quantified claim is a belief
about which objects satisfy the immediate subformulas,
and the challenge will be to select objects that either support or refute that belief.
There are four cases,
whether I believe a universal quantifier to be true or false,
and whether I believe an existentially quantified formula to be true or false.
DAVE: So let's look at some examples using Tarski's World.
We'll start by examining the first of these sentences,
"for all x Cube(x)",
which says, of course, that "every object in the domain is a cube".
Let's start to play the game,
and I'm going to say that I believe that this sentence is true,
obviously its not,
since there are test and dodecs in this world.
So I'm wrong in this belief.
JOHN: Tarski's World first asks you to confirm your belief.
Perhaps it thinks it couldn't possibly be serious.
But then it tells you what it's going to do.
It says that since you believe that the sentence is true,
you believe that every object satisfies "Cube(x)",
and that it is going to try to prove you wrong by choosing a block that does not.
When you say to proceed,
Tarski's World does exactly what it says it would and it chooses a block.
It has lots of blocks to choose from and it does so randomly.
If a block that it chooses has no name,
then it gives it a name.
DAVE: So now, Tarski's World has assigned this large tetrahedron the name "n1".
And I'm being asked to confirm that I believe the sentence "Cube(n1)" is true.
If I proceed, Tarski's World immediately tells me that I
lost because the sentence is false,
not true as I claimed.
"Cube(n1)" is not true of this object which Tarski's World chose, it's a tetrahedron.
JOHN: Now, let's see what happens if you claim correctly that the sentence is false.
Well, last time you believed that the sentence was true,
so Tarski's World tried to prove that it was false.
This time, you're trying to prove that the sentence is false.
And so your strategy is to do exactly what Tarski's World did before.
Tarski's World says that you have to choose a block which does
not satisfy the formula "Cube(x)".
Right. This large tetrahedron that Tarski's World
picked before doesn't satisfy the formula "Cube(x)" as we know.
Since it doesn't have a name,
Tarski's World picked one for me again, "n1".
And now I'm asked to confirm that I believe that "Cube(n1)" is false.
And I'm happy to do that because I'll win.
"Cube(n1)" is indeed false. It's a tetrahedron.
JOHN: Now, back up, and suppose that instead of choosing that tetrahedron,
you instead choose that large cube at the back left.
DAVE: Why would I do that, John?
JOHN: Well, obviously you wouldn't do that on purpose.
But perhaps you misunderstand or maybe you're
trying to explain to someone what would happen if you did choose it.
DAVE: Okay. So if I choose this large cube,
then Tarski's World asks me to confirm that I believe that "Cube(n1)" is false.
And when I do, Tarski's World says that I lose.
I can almost hear the gloating tone in its voice.
But it even tells me that though I lost,
I could've won because I was right to believe that the original sentence was false.
JOHN: You just picked the wrong cube.
JOHN: So let's turn our attention to the second sentence.
"There is an x Cube(x)",
which we're using to illustrate the rules for the existentially quantified sentences.
Now, suppose I say that I believe that this sentence is true,
I believe that there is a cube.
In this case, Tarski's World challenges me to find a block that satisfies the formula.
That is, it satisfies the formula "Cube(x)". I know that only cubes satisfy this formula,
and so I choose one of the cubes,
say, the small one at the front, and I continue.
DAVE: After naming that block "n1",
Tarski's World asks me to confirm that I believe
the sentence "Cube(n1)" is true, which it is.
And we win. Well done, John.
JOHN: Of course, if I had picked something that was not a cube,
then I would have lost,
even though I was correct to believe that the original sentence was true.
DAVE: And finally, let's consider the case when you
believe that an existential sentence is false.
In this case, Tarski's World will try to prove you wrong.
How could it do that?
Well, we'd have to find an object in the world which is a cube.
That would be a counterexample to the claim that there is no such cube.
In this case, Tarski's World has plenty of blocks to choose from.
So it can win the game.
You're wrong to believe that there is no cubes since there are cubes. Three, in fact.
JOHN: Okay.
We looked at some examples.
Let's see if we can summarize the rules for the quantifiers.
In the case of universal formulas,
the goal is always to find a block which does not satisfy the subformula.
If you believe that the sentence is true,
then it's Tarski's World's job to do this because if it can win,
if it can, it will have proved you wrong.
If you believe that the sentence is false,
then you get to do this.
And if you can, then you'll have demonstrated that you are indeed correct in your belief.
DAVE: And in the case of existentially quantified sentences,
the goal is always to choose an object that does satisfy the formula.
If you believe that the sentence is true,
then it's your job to do this because it'll demonstrate you're correct.
Otherwise, its Tarski's World's job to do this
since doing so will demonstrate that you are incorrect.
JOHN: Now, the examples that we've just gone through are
the simplest kind since there's a single quantifier.
The subformula is atomic,
and there's only one occurrence of the free variable in the subformula.
This can get a lot more complicated when
the subformulas have multiple occurrences of the variable,
and the subformulas are complicated,
including cases where there are further quantifiers in the formula.
DAVE: We're going to look at one slightly more complex example before we finish this video.
But you should spend some time playing the game with
some complex sentences to ensure that you have a firm grasp on these game rules.
Playing the game would be a useful tool to help you understand
the semantics of first-order quantifiers
as we go through the rest of the course.
JOHN: Okay. So let's look at the sentence.
"There is an x, (Medium(x) and Cube(x))".
So there is at least one medium cube.
Let's first think about what this sentence means.
Well, the inner formula will be satisfied by any object named
"n" that makes the sentence "Medium(n) and Cube(n)" true.
And we know that for this sentence to be true,
both conjuncts have to be true.
So "n" must be a medium cube.
So this sentence says, as I said,
that there is some object which is both medium and a cube,
or more naturally, "there is a medium cube".
DAVE: Well, if we look in this world,
we'll see that there is no such medium cube,
or we'll fail to see that there is a medium cube.
So they expect this sentence to evaluate to false,
which it does.
JOHN: So let's suppose that we're surprised by this and
we play the game saying that we believe that the formula is true.
Well, in that case,
we must believe that some objects satisfies the formula "Medium(x) and Cube(x)",
and Tarski's World challenges us to pick such an object.
Suppose that we choose this small cube at the front of the world.
Tarski's World gave this block the name "n1" and points out that I must
believe that the sentence "Cube(n1) and Medium(n1)" is true.
And that further entails that I believe that
both the formulae "Medium(n1)" and "Cube(n1)" are true.
Tarski's World gets to choose one of these formulas as false.
So it tries to prove me wrong by choosing the formula "Medium(n1)" and saying,
of course, that since I believe both Medium(n1) and Cube(n1),
I must believe Medium(n1).
Obviously, that's false.
So I lose the game.
JOHN: Obviously, we should choose
a medium-sized object to convince Tarski's World that we're right.
So let's back up and do that.
This time, let's pick the medium dodecahedron "f" at the front of the board.
DAVE: I don't think this is going to work, John.
Tarski's World says that we must believe the sentence "Medium(f) and
Cube(f)". And that means that I must believe
both that "Medium(f)" is true and that "Cube(f)" is true.
This time, Tarski's World gets to pick
the formula "Cube(f)" because we believe that this formula is true when it's in fact false.
JOHN: We encourage you to play around with the game to see how the quantifier game rules work.
For now, just use sentences with a single quantifier.
There's some exercises in the textbook for you to do,
and I'm sure that you'll be able to make up some on your own.
Remember that whenever you encounter the sentences that
evaluate differently from what you expect,
you should play the game to see why they have the value that they do.
DAVE: We're gonna look at some more examples sentences in the next video.
In particular, we're going to talk about how to
translate commonly occurring kinds of sentences from
English into FOL so that you can learn to take
advantage of the power of the expanded language.
In this video, we've completed the project of defining
the syntax and semantics of first-order sentences.
JOHN: And so that's a major achievement.
DAVE: Yep. There were lots of pieces to this process.
First, on the syntax side,
we introduced quantifier symbols and their associated variables,
and then we described which expressions counted
as sentences by considering the notion of bound and free variables.
JOHN: With the definition of sentence in hand,
we were then able to spend this video to det-
defining how to determine the truth value of first-order sentences.
Since the first-order quantifiers make claims about collections of objects,
we first had to define which objects are under consideration.
What we call the domain.
DAVE: In natural language we never do this,
relying on shared intuition.
But in logic, we have to be explicit about the range of objects under consideration.
JOHN: Since the subformula of
a quantified sentence is not typically itself a sentence,
we needed to introduce an auxiliary notion called satisfaction.
This is a relationship between objects and expressions containing one free variable.
DAVE: So such expressions describe properties,
and an object satisfies the expression if and only if the object has that property.
We can tell whether it does by replacing all occurrences of the free
variable with the name of the object and then seeing if we have a true sentence.
JOHN: Finally, we were able to say that a universally quantified sentence is
true if and only if all the objects in the domain satisfy the subexpression.
Similarly, an existentially quantified sentence is
true if some object in the domain satisfies the expression.
DAVE: We recommend that you spend some time practicing
evaluating first-order expressions using Tarski's World.
There are exercises on this in the textbook,
and of course, we'll be assigning some of them.
JOHN: It's very important to become familiar with the process of
translating between sentences of natural language and first-order logic.
Our next video will be devoted to developing that skill.
So until then. [MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
