DAVE: We're going to spend this section of the lecture making sure that
the relationship between logical truth and tautologies
is clear and then we're also going to introduce
another class of sentences that we call "Tarski's World truths".
Sentences that are true in every Tarski's World.
We're going to investigate how these sentences too fit into our picture.
JOHN: We're going to draw a diagram to represent
the relationship between tautology and logical truth.
We start by drawing a circle to represent the set of logical truths.
We've drawn this circle with a fuzzy outline to represent
the fact that we don't have a precise definition of the set of logical truths.
Some sentences, logical truths,
live inside this circle.
Sentences which are not logical truths live outside the circle.
DAVE: Now, let's extend this diagram to indicate the set of tautologies.
Remember that if a sentence is a tautology,
then it's definitely a logical truth.
So a circle representing the tautologies must be
completely inside the circle of logical truths.
But since there are some logical truths that are not tautologies,
then the circles are not the same.
The two ideas do not mean the same thing.
Notice, that the set of tautologies is precisely defined
so this circle has a nice, clean, sharp edge.
JOHN: To be sure that we understand the relationship between these circles,
let's place some sentences in the diagram in the appropriate positions.
So let's start with the sentence "(not B and either not A or B) implies not A".
This was the first sentence that we used to demonstrate the truth table method,
and this sentence if you recall is,
in fact, a tautology.
DAVE: So we can place this sentence in the diagram inside the circle for tautologies.
Notice, that we can immediately see that this sentence is
also a logical truth because it's inside the circle for logical truths.
Okay. So how about the sentence "Tet(a)"?
This sentence is not a logical truth.
After all, there are logically possible situations in which "a" is not a tetrahedron.
Consequently, we'll put "Tet(a)" outside the set of logical truths.
Notice, we also know that it's not a tautology because it's outside both circles.
Now, let's think about the sentence, "a = a".
This is a logical truth,
there's no way that this sentence can be false.
The object named by "a"is definitely the same object as the object named by "a".
However, this is not a tautology.
You can use the truth table test to see if you want.
If you made a truth table for "a = a",
you'd find that there was a row in which it was false.
This sentence so must be placed in a circle for logical truth,
but it's got to be outside the circle of tautologies.
DAVE: So our diagram now displays example of
the three kinds of sentence that this diagram represents.
Perhaps you'd like to think of where some other sentences go.
Place them at the appropriate places in the diagram. How about these?
"Tet(a) or not Tet(a)",
"Smaller(a, b) implies Larger(b, a)",
and "Cube(a) or Dodec(a) or Tet(a)".
Let's spend a little bit of time now thinking about another set of sentences.
The sentences that come out true in every possible Tarski's World.
We'll call these sentences "Tarski's World truths" or TW truths for short.
Where do we draw the circle that contains this set of sentences?
DAVE: That's a good question.
Every Tarski's World situation is a logically possible situation,
there's nothing logically suspect about imagining blocks on a checkerboard.
In fact, we've all probably encountered situations, that are at least similar,
in real life with chess pieces and checkers instead of blocks.
So the set of Tarski's World situations is
contained in the set of logically possible situations,
and that means that every logical truth must
be a Tarski Word truth that is, true in every possible world.
JOHN: But world has special kinds of situations,
so they're highly constrained compared to general logically possible situations.
As a consequence of these additional constraints,
there are going to be sentences that are true in
every world, that will not be true in a less constrained situation.
DAVE: An obvious example is the sentence "Tet(a)
or Cube(a) or Dodec(a)".
This sentence is true in every Tarski's World,
but it isn't necessarily true in every possible situation.
It won't be true in situations where "a" is a sphere or an icosahedron or
a lamppost or fish or pterodactyl because Tarski's World's contain only blocks,
and these blocks are constrained to be either cubes, dodecahedron, or tetrahedra.
This is a TW truth,
but it's not a logical truth.
So the circle for TW truths must be outside the circle for logical truths,
but it must contain space for sentences like
this one that are not logical truths but are Tarski's World truths.
JOHN: In principle, we have a method for determining whether a sentence is a TW truth.
We can simply look at every single world,
and evaluate the sentence in that world.
The problem with this approach is that there's
a very large number of possible Tarski's Worlds.
DAVE: Yep, it turns out that there are more than 100 billion trillion different arrangements
of blocks on the checkerboard even when you
don't consider the different arrangements of labels.
A billion trillion, also known as a sextillion, is 10 to
the power 23 or one followed by 23 zeros.
It's about the number of stars in the observable universe I'm told.
JOHN: So I guess that's not a practical procedure.
And even if we did know that a sentence is a TW truth,
this doesn't actually tell us about whether it's
a logical truth which would be more interesting thing to know.
It's actually more interesting to know when something is not a TW truth,
not a Tarski's World Truth because that also tells us that it's not a logical truth.
DAVE: To show that a sentence is not a TW truth,
you simply have to construct a single world which makes the sentence false.
One world that falsifies the sentence is
sufficient to show that it's not true in all worlds.
Now, this isn't trivial,
but there are tricks to finding such a world.
You have to keep in mind the conditions under which each of
the propositional connectives in the sentence result in different truth values,
and use those to guide the search for a world.
JOHN: For example, if your sentence is an implication,
then you know that its antecedent must be true,
and it's consequent false in the world that you're looking for.
DAVE: And if the consequent is a disjunction,
then you know that it's false,
only if all of the disjunctions are false and so on.
JOHN: The result of all this work is that we now have
two different approximations to the notion of logical truth.
The first, tautology, is based on truth tables, and it undergenerates.
That is, some sentences that are not tautologies,
so they're still, in fact, logical truths.
That's because the rows of the truth table for the sentence includes
situations that are not logically possible sometimes.
The second, Tarski's World truth,
TW truth is based on worlds, and it over-generates.
That is, some sentences that are TW truths are not logical truths.
That's because the collection of worlds excludes
some situations that are really logically possible.
DAVE: But finally, we can say something about logical truths using these approximations.
[MUSIC]
