[MUSIC] JOHN: We sometimes have strong intuitions,
that whenever some pieces of information are true,
then some other information must necessarily be true too.
When this happens, we say that
the information is a "logical consequence" of the given information,
or that the information "follows from" the givens.
We want to say that one sentence is a "logical consequence" of some others,
if every logically possible situation in which the given sentences are true,
also makes this other sentence true.
So like logical truth,
the notion of logical consequence is not particularly well-defined,
because it too relies on the idea of a logically possible situation.
DAVE: But just as we developed the idea of tautology as
a precise approximation for the imprecise notion of logical truth,
we can develop a precise approximation of
logical consequence based on the truth table method.
As before, we use the rows of
the truth table as representing different logically possible situations.
We imagine that a row of the truth table,
represents a collection of logically possible situations.
All of those situations in which the formula have that combination of truth values.
By considering what happens in all possible rows of the truth table,
we automatically consider all logically possible situations.
JOHN: We call the approximation of logical consequence that's
based on truth tables "tautological consequence".
We say that a sentence is a tautological consequences of some other sentences,
if every row of the truth table which makes those premise sentences true,
also makes the conclusion sentence true.
DAVE: The method for testing tautological consequence,
has a lot in common with the method for demonstrating that a sentence is a tautology.
The main difference between the two tests,
is that there will be many different sentences on the target side of the truth table.
One for each of the premise sentences,
and another for the conclusion sentence.
The test for consequence will involve looking at
the rows of the truth table which make all the premise sentences true,
and asking whether the conclusion sentence is true in all of those rows.
JOHN: That's the basic idea,
but illustrating this with an example is probably going to make it clearer.
So consider the following sentences.
First sentence, "A or B".
Second sentence, "not A or C". Now I claim from these two sentences.
The sentence "B or C" follows and
indeed is a tautological consequence of those two sentences.
DAVE: You do, do you?
JOHN:I certainly do.
JOHN: Now we can test this claim by building a truth table,
with these three sentences as the target sentences.
So now we're gonna have three target sentences.
First we write the target sentences in three columns on the right side of the table.
Then we identify the atomic sentences that appear in any of the formula.
So in this case,
there are three atomic sentences "A",
"B" and "C". And we write these in the reference columns.
DAVE: Oh, I remember this part.
If there are three reference columns,
then they'll be eight rows of the truth table,
which exhaust the possible combinations of truth values for these atoms.
JOHN: That's right. So next thing that we do,
is put the different combinations of the truth values under the reference columns.
DAVE: We work through each of the sentences in turn,
working out the truth values of the complete sentences,
in each of the rows of the truth table.
It's just like we did for the tautology case except we do at multiple times.
Three times in this case.
One for each sentence.
The first sentence that we consider is the sentence "A or B".
The sentences the disjunction of two atomic formulae,
whose values we can look up in the reference columns.
The sentence is true in each of the rows in which either "A" or "B" is true.
It's false therefore only in rows 7 and 8 of this truth table.
JOHN: The next sentence is slightly more complex,
but we can work out the truth value of the whole sentence,
if we just first work out the truth value of the formula "not A".
We can look up the truth values for "A" in the reference column,
and then "not A" is going to be false,
in any case where "A" is true.
So that's the first four rows of this table.
And then it will be true and all the remaining rows.
DAVE: Now we have the information that we need
to complete the truth value of the second sentence.
It's the disjunction of "not A" whose value we've just worked out,
and "C" which we can look up in the reference column.
JOHN: The last target sentences the disjunction,
"B or C". We can look up the values for
the component sentences "B" and "C" in the reference columns,
and use the rule for disjunction to complete the table.
DAVE: Now that we have the complete table,
we can answer the question of whether the sentence "B or C",
is a tautological consequence of the other two sentences.
First, we identify the rows in which the premise sentences "A or B" and "not A or C",
written in the first two columns of the table are both true.
JOHN: Okay. The relevant rows of the table in which those two sentences are true,
are row one, row three,
row five and row six.
Now we don't consider the others,
because in rows two and four "not A or C" is false.
And in rows 7 and 8,
sentence "A or B" is false.
Now we look at the truth value of the conclusion sentence "B or C" in these rows.
We see that this sentence is true in all four of these chosen rows.
And that means that the conclusion sentence is in
fact a tautological consequence of the other sentences.
Just as I claimed.
DAVE: You were right, John. Here's the rule one more time.
For a sentence "S" to be a tautological consequence of some other sentences,
it must be true whenever those other sentences are true.
So that's why we look only at the rows making the premise sentences true.
The claim of tautological consequence,
only cares about what happens when the premise sentences are true.
The other rows are irrelevant.
If the conclusion sentence is true,
in all of the truth table rows making the premise sentences true.
Then the conclusion sentence is a tautological consequence of the premises.
If it's false in any of those rows,
then it's not a tautological consequence.
JOHN: We can actually use the same table to answer a different question.
Is the sentence "A or B" in target column one,
a tautological consequences of the other two sentences.
"not A or C" and "B or C". So how would we answer this question.
DAVE: Well, we already have the truth table for all three sentences.
So we don't have to rewrite it.
All we've done is to change the roles of the sentences.
When we ask whether "A or B" is a tautological consequences of "not A or C",
and "B or C". We are saying that we should identify the rows of the truth table,
which makes these two formula target sentences
two and three true and then see if "A or B" is true in those rows.
JOHN: So examining the table tells us that both of these sentences are true in rows one,
three, five, six, and seven of the truth table.
So considering these rows,
the sentence "A or B" in a target column one is true in rows one,
three, five and six but it is false in row seven.
This means that the sentence "A or B" is not a tautological consequence of the other two.
There's at least one kind of situation which is described by row seven of this table,
in which the premises are true and the purported conclusion is false
DAVE: Now if a sentence is a tautological consequences of some other sentences,
then it must be a logical consequence.
That's because, every logically possible situation must at
least assign truth values to each of the atomic formula in the sentences.
Therefore, that situation is represented by a row of the truth table,
and we know if the premises are true in that row then the conclusion is true.
JOHN: However, it's always possible that some rows of the truth table do
not represent logically possible situations
if we're given some- given specific sentences.
Just as we saw in the example with tautologies,
we may have reason to believe that situations described by a row just cannot happen.
DAVE: And if the only rows of the truth table in
which the premises are true and the conclusion is false,
are these kind of impossible rows
Then, the sentence could still be a logical consequence of the premises.
It's just not a tautological consequence.
Once again, we see that the truth table method
gives us a way of confirming logical consequence.
If the sentence is a tautological consequence,
that it definitely is a logical consequence.
But even if a sentence fails this test it might still be a logical consequence.
We may just need to find a sharper test.
JOHN: And as you might expect a corresponding notion of Tarski's World consequence is stronger than we need.
Some sentences are Tarski's World consequences of
others even though they are not logical consequences.
DAVE: Right. Every world that you can build in the program in which
the sentence "a is not a cube and a is not a dodecahedron" is true.
Is also a world in which "a is a tetrahedron" is true.
But logically, just because something is not a cube and not a dodecahedron,
it doesn't mean that it must be a tetrahedron.
It could be a frying pan or an egg.
The situation here, is just like we saw for tautologies.
Logical truths and TW truths.
JOHN: There's an important connection between tautologies and tautological consequence.
If we know that a sentence "S" is
a tautological consequences of some premises "P1" through "PN",
then we know that the implication whose antecedent
is the conjunction of the premises "P1" up to "PN",
and whose consequent is "S" is a tautology.
DAVE: Why do we know that this is true?
Well, think about the sentence "P1 and through
PN implies S". Suppose that it's not a tautology.
That is, its false in some row of the truth table.
Since this sentence is an implication,
the only way that it could be false is if the antecedent conjunction is true,
and the conclusion "S" is false.
And that requires a row of the truth table in which each
of the sentences "P1" through "PN" is true.
Since that makes the conjunction true.
And in that row, "S" also has to be false.
But "S" is a tautological consequence of those "P" formulae.
So we know that "S" is true not false in every row that makes all of the "Pi" true.
So there's no row of the truth table making the implication false.
That is, the implication's a tautology.
JOHN: So this tells us that for every tautological consequence relation between formulas,
there's a tautology that describes this relationship in a single formula.
There's one other connection too but this one is a little more subtle.
If "S" is a tautology,
then it is a tautological consequence of any sentence you choose.
DAVE: So if I have a tautology "S",
then "S" is a tautological consequence of "Tet(a)".
JOHN: That's right.
DAVE: It's a tautological consequence of "two plus two equals four".
JOHN: That's right.
DAVE: Is it a tautological consequences of "two plus two equals five and the sky is pink".
JOHN: It is, Dave. Yes. It's a tautological consequences of any sentence that you may choose.
So suppose you choose a bunch of sentences.
Any bunch of sentences.
And you made a truth table for those sentences and the tautology "S".
If "S" is a tautological consequences of those sentences,
then every row that makes the sentences true must also make "S" true.
But since "S" is a tautology it's true in every row
including any rows that may make the premise sentences true.
So "S" is a tautological consequence of those sentences.
DAVE: Well what do you know. This even works if you choose no premises whatsoever.
One way of thinking about a tautology,
is that it's a tautological consequences of an empty collection of premises.
If it weren't there would have to be a row of the truth table
making these empty premises true and the conclusion false.
But since the conclusion's a tautology,
there were no rows like this simply because there are
no rows that make the conclusion false.
JOHN: So in this segment, we've introduced a truth table notion of
consequence which we've called tautological consequence.
If a sentence "S" is a tautological consequences some sentences,
then it is definitely a logical consequence of those sentences.
But if it's not a tautological consequence,
then it might still be a logical consequence.
There's still hope. We may need just to take more information into account.
[MUSIC]
