There's one more kind of relationship between sentences that we're going to discuss and
that's tautological equivalence. Tautological equivalence built on the same framework that
we used to describe tautologies and tautological consequence. If you've understood those ideas then
nothing about tautological equivalence will be surprising. That's right, so the observation here
is that some pairs of sentences are true in exactly the same situations. If the first of
the pair is true and so is the second and vice versa. We say that sentences like this
are logically equivalent. We already alluded to this idea when we said that "if P then Q" means
the same thing as the sentence "not P or Q", and that the sentence "P if and only if Q" means the
same thing as the conjunction "if P then Q and if Q then P". Yeah, we introduced that idea without really
saying what we mean and now we're going to pay that debt. Just as in the case of logical truth
and logical consequence we're going to introduce a precisely defined approximation to the idea of
logical equivalence based on the meaning of the propositional connectives. As you might
expect we're going to call this tautological equivalence. The precise definition is that
two sentences are tautologically equivalent provided that the sentences have the same truth
values whatever the truth value is assigned to their component atomic formulas, or in terms of
truth tables they're true in exactly the same rows of their joint truth table. Now we hope
you can predict exactly what the procedure is going to be, given the description of this idea.
Let's make good on our promise to show that the sentences "P arrow Q", "if P and Q", and "not P or Q"
are logically equivalent, by showing that they're tautologically equivalent. So first we write both
sentences down as target sentences for a joint truth table. Now we identify the atomic sentences
"P" and "Q", in this case. We write and fill the reference columns in the usual way. Someone
should write a computer program to do this. Now we can start to fill in the values of the target sentences.
The first column just contains the implication and this has just one connective. We can fill
the values of this column by referring to the reference columns, and to our knowledge of the
truth table for material implication. Remember that this sentence is only false when the antecedent
is true and the consequent false. The values in the other target sentence are only slightly more
complicated. There we first fill in the values for the formula "not P" reversing the values in
the reference column for "P". And now we can fill in the truth values as a disjunction using the
values for the negation and the reference column for "Q". In other words you just use the
usual procedure for filling out the truth table for these two sentences. Now, the test for tautological
equivalence is pretty obvious and pretty straightforward. We look at the truth values for
the two sentences and we see whether they are the same in every row of the truth table. If they're
the same in every row, either both true or both false, then these sentences are tautologically
equivalent. If there's any row in which their truth values are different then the sentences
are not tautologically equivalent. So these two sentences are tautologically equivalent as we
promised, since their truth values agree in every row. And that means that these sentences are logically
equivalent because whatever we know about logically possible situations they must assign truth values
to the atomic sentences and consequently every logically possible situation is represented by
a row of the truth table. The sentences have the same value in that row and therefore they have
the same value in that situation. But just like the situation for tautology and logical truth
if two sentences are not tautologically equivalent then they may still be logically equivalent. That's
because there may be logical reasons that some rows of the truth table cannot occur
based on the meanings of the atomic formulas. Now suppose that this is the only row in which
the sentences have different truth values then the sentences are true in all of the logically
possible situations and that makes them logically equivalent but not tautologically equivalent. We
strongly recommend going through the procedure that we just described to decide whether we were
correct when we said that the sentence "P if and only if Q" is tautologically equivalent to the
conjunction "P arrow Q and Q arrow P". And here's a hint, we were. We're going to show the completed
truth table in just a moment. Pause the video now and take a few minutes to complete it for yourself.
So does your truth table look like this one? We hope it does. Now notice that the two sentences
are both true in the first and fourth rows, and both false in the second and third rows. Meaning that
these sentences are tautologically equivalent. In this lecture we've put our language of first-order
logic to work. We defined three important ideas. Each of these ideas is an approximation to a more
philosophical notion, but unlike the corresponding general notion these ideas are precisely defined
and we can easily determine whether the properties hold. Now the most fundamental property is that of
tautological consequence which is our precisely defined analogue of logical consequence. In general,
we're interested in whether one sentence follows from, or is a logical consequence of, others. What
this means is that we want to be sure, given that some other sentences are true, that this
sentence is true too. This is a really important idea when building an argument for a particular
position. Our approximation to this idea is that of tautological consequence. We use a truth table
to work out the truths of all of the sentences in every row of the truth table and then decide
if the consequent sentence is true in every row which makes the given sentences true. Now
this is an approximation to the more general notion but we can learn a lot from this test.
In particular, if the sentence is a tautological consequence of others then it must be a logical
consequence of those sentences. Similarly we've defined the notion of tautological equivalence. Two
sentences are tautologically equivalent if each is a tautological consequence of the other. And a
logical truth is a sentence which is true in every row of it's truth table or if you prefer a sentence
which is a tautological consequence of any set of sentences. Now these ideas are very powerful.
One of the things that we should be asking if we want to evaluate an argument to see whether we
should be convinced of its conclusion, is whether that conclusion is a logical consequence of its
assumptions. One thing that we could try to do, is translate the argument into first-order
logic and then use the truth table method to see whether the conclusion is a tautological
consequence of the givens. Of course we can do this only if the sentences translate into the
propositional language that we've discussed so far, but this is the kind of tools that the study
of logic provides. In the next lecture we're going to look at different equivalent ways
of expressing similar propositions. We've already seen that certain propositions can be expressed
in many ways and we'll be more systematic about investigating these equivalent forms. This will
lead us to two important observations about our language. The first is that it's possible to put
sentences into equivalent standard forms, while the second is that the language that we have
so far discussed is, in an important sense, the most expressive language that we could
develop using truth functional connectives. We hope you'll join us for the next lecture.
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
