DAVE: Welcome back. I'm Dave.
JOHN: And I'm still John.
DAVE: In this video, we're going to revisit our discussion of the concepts of logical truth,
logical equivalence, and logical consequence in
the context of the full language of first order logic.
JOHN: Now, recall that these ideas are informal and we don't have precise definitions for them.
However, in propositional logic,
we had an approximation to the ideas that we called
tautology and tautological equivalence and tautological consequence.
These approximations gave us a positive test.
Every tautology is a logical truth, for example,
but not an exact test,
some logical truths happen not to be tautologies.
DAVE: So now that we have an expanded more expressive language,
we need to define new approximations to
logical truth and friends based on this new language.
We'll see first that we can still use the propositional theory for the expanded language.
Some sentence will be tautologies even though they contain quantifiers.
JOHN: But the bulk of this lecture consists of describing a new test for
logical truth which takes into account the quantifier symbols.
We'll see that the increased expressive power of first-order logic leads
to a better approximation of the underlying concepts of logical truth,
logical consequences, and so forth.
But this comes at a cost,
namely that the test that we need to carry out is much more complex.
DAVE: So let's get to it.
JOHN: In the lectures on propositional logic,
we introduced the very important notion of a tautology
and the notion of tautological consequences and tautological equivalence.
DAVE: One thing that we want to consider is how
these ideas can be extended into our new language.
Does it make sense to say a sentence of
first order logic is a tautology and if so, under what circumstances?
JOHN: Well, the method that we've introduced for determining whether a sentence is a tautology
depended crucially on the fact that the propositional connectives are truth-functional.
And since quantifiers don't have this property,
it's at the very least not obvious that
the idea is going to translate over into the new context.
DAVE: On the other hand, we did say that a formula like "P or
not P" is a tautology regardless of the formula that we replace "P" with.
For example, "Cube(a) or not Cube(a)" is a tautology and
"(Small(c) and Cube(c)) or not (Small(c) and Cube(c))" are tautologies by this principle.
JOHN: If we substitute a quantified formula here,
then we will still get a tautology.
After all the fact that this is a tautology depends only on the fact that the formula
is repeated within this particular configuration of propositional connectives.
So the sentence, "for all x Cube(x) or not for all x Cube(x)" is still a tautology.
It says that "either everything is a cube or it is not the case that everything is a cube".
DAVE: And sentences don't get much more tautological than that.
The key thing to notice here is that the quantifiers in the sentence
appear in a position within
the propositional connectives that define the tautological form.
The formula is an instance of the form "P or not P" and
all instances of this form are tautologies
including instances that contain quantified formulae.
JOHN: This first-order sentence, while it looks similar presents a more difficult case,
"for all x (Cube(x) or not Cube(x))".
Whatever a logically possible situation is it contains a bunch of objects.
There are only two possibilities for each object,
either it satisfies "Cube(x)" or it doesn't.
And so every object satisfies the disjunction whatever the situation looks like.
So this sentence is a logical truth,
however it's really not a tautology.
DAVE: One way to see how this can't be
a tautology is to think about how we might build the truth table for this formula.
The first step in that process is to identify the atomic sentences in the formula,
so that we can build columns for these formulae and consider their possible truth values,
but this sentence has no atomic subsentences.
Remember, "Cube(x)" isn't a sentence but a formula since it contains
a free variable and can't have
truth values and so couldn't appear as a column of the truth table.
JOHN: Now, what we've discovered here is actually a good thing in a couple of ways.
One is that we can keep the notion of tautology and
tautological consequences and tautological equivalence
in the context of first-order logic.
If a sentence containing quantifiers is an instance of a tautological form,
then that sentence is still a tautology.
But the other part is that there are sentences such as the one that we've just looked
at that are logical truths, but not tautologies.
And that's good because it means that our theory of first-order logic is stronger
and more sensitive to the form of sentences than propositional logic was.
DAVE: We can provide a modified version of the tautology test and its cousins for
consequence and equivalence for first-order sentences in a pretty straightforward way.
The key observation is that first-order sentences have
truth values just as atomic propositional sentences do.
So when we want to tell whether a sentence of first-order logic is a tautology,
we can simply treat any quantified sentence
embedded within it as if it were an atomic formula.
We'll make a reference column for
the distinct quantified subsentences in the sentence just as we do for atomic formulae,
and then we proceed with the truth table method as usual.
JOHN: So if we apply this test to the sentence for
"all x Cube(x) or not for all x Cube(x)" to see that it's a tautology,
we build a truth table with one reference column for- "for
all x Cube(x)" and then proceed as usual.
And here is the truth table.
DAVE: Now notice this is exactly one reference column and
that reference column refers to the complex
quantified sentence "for all x Cube(x)" because
that's the only thing in the sub-component that has a truth value.
Now, when we consider the formula "for all x (Cube(x) or not Cube(x)))",
then this whole formula must be treated as if it were atomic,
it gets a reference column just for the whole formula.
And we get this truth table which has two possibilities for
the whole quantified formula and
therefore two possibilities for the formula as a whole because those are the same thing.
That demonstrates that this sentence is not a tautology,
it's false in some row of its truth table.
There's a small subtlety concerning sentences containing
quantifiers embedded within quantifiers.
Consider, for example, the sentence,
"for all x there is a y LeftOf(x,y)
or it's not the case that for all x there is y LeftOf(x,y)".
The sentence for" all x there is a y LeftOf(x,y)"
is treated as an atomic formulas we've just discussed,
and that means that we do not need to think about
the existentially quantified form- subformula.
It's just a part of the larger formula which we are essentially treating as a black box.
All we care about is whether it's either true or false.
DAVE: So the principle here is that you can continue to
use the methods for determining whether a sentence is
a tautology or whether a sentence is taulogically equivalent to
another or a tautological consequences of some others in first-order logic.
The only thing to remember is that quantified formulae are
treated exactly like atomic formulae when building the truth table.
We analyze them no further than they have a truth value,
either true or it's false.
And we do that because from the point of view of the truth table,
they're just components of the sentence with
no true functional subparts exactly like atomic formulae.
JOHN: And the same principle is going to apply to determining whether formulas of
first-order logic are tautological consequences or tautologically equivalent.
In both cases, we simply treat the quantified sentences that appear in
them as subformulas as if they were atoms.
Like atoms, we know that they have truth values even if some of their components don't.
We just use the appropriate procedure that we previously described with
a possibility that reference columns are going to be headed
by more complex quantified sentences.
DAVE: In the next part of this lecture,
we'll be considering the remaining problem,
namely how to determine whether a formula of
first-order logic is a logical truth even if it's not a tautology.
[MUSIC].
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
