[MUSIC] DAVE: In propositional logic,
we said that tautology was our model of logical truth.
In first-order logic, the analogous idea is that of a first-order validity.
A first-order validity is a sentence which we can see must always be true,
because of the meanings of the connectives and quantifiers
that appear inside it and its structure.
Oh, and we also take into account the meaning of the equality predicate.
JOHN: Just as in propositional logic,
there are two other important ideas in first-order logic, consequence and equivalence.
We will say that if the two first-order sentences are "first-order equivalent",
if they're true in exactly the same logically possible situations
as defined for first-order logic.
This is exactly analogous to the notion of
tautological equivalence from propositional logic.
DAVE: And as you should expect,
we'll say that a sentence is
a "first-order consequence" of some other collection of sentences.
When the truth of those sentences is sufficient to
guarantee the truth of the sentence in every logically possible situation.
So this is how it is;
the first row of this table names the philosophical concepts that we're interested in,
the second row contains the names of their models in
propositional logic an approximation to the general idea,
and the third row gives the names of the same when modeled in first-order logic.
JOHN: All of these ideas hinge on the particular way that we've modeled
a situation in the theory of first-order semantics.
As we've seen, we model logically possible situations by imagining
a collection of objects possibly with names assigned to them,
with properties, and with relations between them.
DAVE: Tarski's Worlds are logically possible situations in this sense.
There's a collection of objects with properties like being
cubes in relations like being to the left of another object,
and some objects, of course, have names.
JOHN: Of course, not every logically possible situation is a Tarski's World.
There are other logically possible situations which
contain people in relationships with one another.
DAVE: Like Romeo and Juliet.
JOHN: Or like the real world.
We can even think of mathematical situations where
the objects are numbers with properties like "being even",
and are- they are related by relations like "being greater than".
Each of these are logically possible situations.
DAVE: We've already explained that a sentence is
a first-order validity if it's true in every situation or conversely,
if we can construct a situation which makes the sentence false,
then the sentence is not a first-order validity.
The notions of first-order equivalence and consequence should be pretty clear too.
JOHN: We say that two sentences are first-order equivalent when they
have the same truth value in every logically possible situation.
DAVE: To demonstrate that two sentences of first-order logic are equivalent,
we would need to look in all of the logically possible situations,
and see whether the two sentences have
the same truth value or construct some argument which indicates that this must happen.
Conversely, to show that two sentences are not first-order equivalent,
we simply show that there's a situation in which one of
the sentences is true and the other false.
The existence of a single situation like this is
sufficient to show that the sentences are not first-order equivalent.
JOHN: If the sentences are "S" and "T",
then "S" and "T" are first-order equivalent if and only if
"S biconditional T" is a first-order validity.
If "S" and "T" have the same truth value in every situation,
then the equivalence will be true in
every situation because of the truth table for biconditional.
DAVE: We say that a sentence "S" is a first-order consequence of a collection of sentences,
"T1" through "Tn", if every situation that makes the formulae "T1" through "Tn" true,
also makes the formula "S" true.
So to show that "S" follows from these formulae,
we look at each situation.
We first work out whether the premise sentences are true in this situation.
If they aren't, then we're not interested in the situation.
We only care about the truth value of "S"
in situations where the premise sentences are true.
JOHN: If this situation makes the premise sentences true,
then we look at the truth value of "S". If "S" is false,
then we have found a counterexample situation and
"S" is not a first-order consequence of the premises.
But on the other hand, if "S" is true,
we have to keep looking for a counterexample situation.
If we don't find one,
then we don't know whether there isn't one that we
just haven't come across or that we're not creative enough.
But if there is absolutely no possible situation in which "T1" through "Tn" are all true,
and "S" is false,
then we know that "S" is a first-order consequence of the premise sentences, "T1" through "Tn".
Equivalently, if "S" is a first-order consequence of "T1" through "Tn",
then the formula conjunction "T1" and up to
"Tn" implies "S". That's gonna to be a first-order validity.
And again, this is because of the truth value- the truth
functional meanings of the connectives, conjunction, and implication.
JOHN: We're going to finish this lecture by considering this collection of sentences.
"It's not the case that there is an x Smaller(a, x)".
"It's not the case, there is an x Smaller(x,b)",
"Smaller(c,d)", and "Smaller(b,a)".
We're going to ask whether the sentence "Smaller(b,a)"
follows from the other three sentences.
DAVE: It turns out that it's not a consequence of those sentences as we'll demonstrate.
The first thing we have to do is rename the predicates in
these sentences so that we don't assume a particular meaning for them.
The sentences contain just one predicate symbol, namely "Smaller".
So we duplicate the argument but using
the uninterpreted predicate symbol "R" in place of "Smaller".
So now we have the sentences,
"not there exists x R(a,x)",
"not there exists x R(x,b)",
"R(c,d)", and our question is whether "R(b,a)" follows.
JOHN: Now, here's a picture of a counterexample situation.
We've drawn arcs between the objects related by the relation "R",
whatever we decide it means.
And in this situation,
the first three formulas are true and the conclusion formula is false.
DAVE: This example demonstrates two things.
The first is the method for determining whether
one sentence is a first-order consequence of others.
Just as for validity,
we first replace predicates with meaningless letters and then build a situation.
In the case of consequence,
we build a situation in which the premise formulae
are all true and the conclusion is false.
And this is a counterexample to
the claim that the sentence is a consequence of the others.
Since if it were a consequence,
every situation making the premises true would also make the conclusion sentence true.
JOHN: Let's go back to the picture that we drew at
the end of the section on propositional logic.
Recall that this picture shows a circle
which is supposed to contain the set of logical truths.
Because we're uncertain about the scope of the circle,
we have drawn it with a fuzzy boundary.
DAVE: But we have two approximations to the idea of logical truth.
On the one hand, we have the idea of tautology.
This is a sharply defined set of sentences in
propositional logic that are true in every row of their truth table.
Every tautology is a logical truth,
and so the circle containing the tautologies is within the set of logical truths.
JOHN: On the other hand,
we have the idea of Tarski's World validity.
This too is a precisely defined set of sentences.
The sentences that are true in every Tarski's World.
Now, as we discussed,
there are finitely many such words,
and so it's theoretically possible to look at all of them to
check whether a sentence is Tarski's World, TW validity.
DAVE: But remember there was some sentences that are
Tarski's World validities which are not logical truths.
They happen to be true in all Tarski's World,
but that's only because of the worlds have a lot of
constraints such that every object is either a tetrahedron,
a cube, or dodecahedron.
So the set of Tarski's World validities includes
all of the logical truths with some more sentences besides.
JOHN: Now, we can consider where the circle for first-order validities fits into this picture.
Now, as we've seen, there are first-order validities that are not tautologies.
The example that we gave before was the formula "for all x,
(Cube(x), or not Cube(x))".
Everything is either a cube or not a cube.
DAVE: This tells us that the circle for first-order validities should
be larger than the circle for tautologies, which is good.
JOHN: Now, is the set of first-order validities the same as the set of logical truths?
That is, does the idea of first-order validity
capture exactly the philosophical concept of logical truth?
JOHN: Well, the answer sadly is no.
The problem is that first-order logic is not
expressive enough to say many things that we can say in English,
and indeed, some of these sentences are logical truths.
DAVE: Here's an example sentence.
"If most cubes are small and green,
then most cubes are small".
You should take a moment to convince yourself that this is logically true,
but imagine a situation in which there are
a 100 objects in the world and say 50 of them are cubes.
Let's be precise and say that "most" means "more than half".
So the antecedent "most cubes are small and green"
means that at least 26 of the cubes are small green cubes.
Now, it's possible that there are some other small cubes,
but at the very least there are 26 small cubes,
namely the ones that are also green.
And so the consequent is definitely true.
And this sentence is, therefore, a logical truth.
Notice that nothing here depends on the meanings that the predicates cube and green.
DAVE: Now, it's an interesting fact about FOL that there's no way
to express the quantifier "most" in the language.
There is nothing odd about the quantifier "most".
It's just that the language of FOL lacks the resources required to express it.
There's no sentence in FOL that means "most cubes are small".
And this fact, that we won't prove,
is sufficient to show that there are logical truths which are not
first-order validities simply because they can't be expressed in FOL.
JOHN: Now, this means that the circle representing the set of
first-order validities must be inside the circle for logical truths.
DAVE: In this video, we've described new notions based on first-order logic.
A sentence is a first-order validity if it's true
however you interpret the predicate and constant symbols appearing in the sentence.
This is a better approximation to logical truth than tautology is
in the sense that some logical truths that are not tautologies are,
in fact, first-order validities.
JOHN: But the unhappy truth about the test for whether a sentence is
a first-order validity is that the test is very difficult to carry out.
DAVE: Which is a bit of an understatement.
Not only is it difficult for a human to carry out,
but there's no possible procedure that can be
followed that's guaranteed to give a definite answer to this question.
And that's true whether it's a human or a computer carrying out the test.
JOHN: Or maybe a Martian.
DAVE: Even a Martian. So although we can sometimes definitely shows that
a sentence is not a first-order validity by producing a counter-example,
we're out of luck in general.
We'll need to be creative in coming up with the proposed counterexamples,
and even then, we might not be able to do so.
Exactly the same observations apply to the notions of
first-order equivalence and first-order consequence too.
JOHN: In our next lecture, we're going to talk about some important first-order equivalences.
These will show how sentences of first-order logic relate to each other.
Among other things, this will have the consequence that we can
show that the language of first-order logic is redundant.
Like the language of propositional logic,
we don't need all the symbols that we have
introduced for the expressive power that we've obtained.
DAVE: And in addition, we'll be able to define a normal form for
quantified formulae similar to the kind of normal forms for propositional logic.
We hope that you'll join us for the next lecture. Until then.
JOHN: Bye-bye.
[MUSIC].
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
