[MUSIC] DAVE: Welcome back.
I'm Dave Barker-Plummer.
JOHN: And I'm John Etchemendy.
DAVE: In this lecture, we're going to talk about how we can build
more complex claims out of simple atomic sentences.
We do this using "connectives",
which as you might expect,
connect together smaller sentences into larger ones.
JOHN: Now, in English, we have words like "and", "not",
"however", "but", and many more,
and thi- those are connectives in- in English.
Now, we're gonna introduce a small collection of connectives,
five in total, which will do the job of all of these English words.
DAVE: Now, a very important feature of
the connectives of first-order logic is that they are "truth functional".
And that means that you can determine the truth of a sentence formed with a connective
simply by knowing the truth values of
its component parts and the connective used to connect them.
JOHN: Now, this is a very important feature of our language.
It removes a lot of the complexity and the ambiguity of natural languages.
Now, natural languages don't actually always have this property.
It also allows us to clearly present the semantics of
connective symbols using a device called "truth tables".
DAVE: In this lecture, we're going to introduce three of these connectives.
We call these the "Boolean" connectives since
they were extensively studied by George Boole,
an English logician from the 19th century.
JOHN: Now, connectives in general connect
together smaller sentences and they build larger sentences.
For example, in English, we might say,
"Ewan is at home and Quinn is at the library."
This is a sentence which makes a claim about the world,
but it contains two other claims within it.
This kind of claim is what we call a "conjunction".
It says that both of two smaller claims are true.
DAVE: The word "and" is a clue that this sentence is a conjunction,
but there are in fact, lots of ways to make a conjunctive claim in English.
We might instead use the words "but" or "however" to express the same claim.
As we saw when we talked about atomic sentences,
there are lots of ways to say the same thing in English,
to make the same claim.
And we use different formulations for other reasons such as pragmatics.
JOHN: If I'm asked whether Ewan and Quinn are both at home, I might answer,
"Ewan is at home,
but Quinn is at the library," to emphasize the contrast for example.
Or I might say,
"Quinn is at the library; however,
Ewan is at home," if I wanted to emphasize Quinn's location.
DAVE: From a logical perspective though,
these sentences all make the same claim,
the compound claim that both smaller claims that
Quinn is at the library and that Ewan is at home are true.
Consequently, we'll have a single way to express conjunction in logic.
The connective "and" which looks like a capital "A" with the horizontal bar removed.
We'll use this in each of the cases described above.
JOHN: This means that translation between English and FOL might be quite tricky.
You'll have to identify words in English
that serve to form the conjunction of two claims.
The word "and" will not always be there,
but it often will be.
DAVE: And even when the word "and" does appear and signals a conjunction,
there will often be work to do.
In these examples, we use the word "and" to conjoin two claims,
Ewan is at home and Quinn is at the library.
But the word "and" can be used in English to stand between two names.
For example, "Quinn and Ewan are at the ice cream store".
The word "and" appears between the words "Quinn" and "Ewan",
and these are names not claims.
JOHN: Now, logically, this sentence makes two claims.
We could rewrite the sentences,
"Quinn is at the ice cream store and Ewan is at the ice cream store".
This sentence means the same thing as the previous one.
It's longer and it's more cumbersome,
but it makes the same logical claims.
Now, our logical connective "and" will always join together two sentences.
So it will sometimes be necessary to do this kind of
rewriting to move the use of the word "and" from
between two names or- or nouns more generally so that joins two sentences.
DAVE: A similar thing happens with properties in English.
You can say that Ewan is smart and funny,
for example, which is a way of saying that Ewan is smart and that Ewan is funny.
In the first example,
the two objects shared the same property,
being at the ice cream store.
In this example, two properties are shared by the same object.
JOHN: But the principle is the same,
these sentences really express the conjunction of two claims.
When we translate into FOL,
we have to identify the two claims,
translate each of them,
and then form the conjunction of the two claims.
And this is because connectives in FOL always connect together smaller claims.
DAVE: Conjunction can sometimes be expressed in English
without explicitly using any word to indicate it.
For example, in the sentence "c is a small tetrahedron."
This sentence means that "c" is both small and a tetrahedron.
When you express it this way,
the word "and" reappears and it becomes obvious that this is a conjunction in disguise.
JOHN: So again, you have to be careful to identify the simplest possible claims and to
rephrase the sentence to make these
explicit before attempting to translate any sentence into FOL.
DAVE: So we hope that you're beginning to get a sense of the purpose of
developing a formal language for expressing claims.
We haven't really begun to scratch the surface yet,
but you can see that English and natural languages in general are very complicated.
There are lots of alternative ways to say things and we choose
among them any number of ways to do with convenience,
or focus, or just variety.
The language of FOL removes a lot of this complexity,
allowing us to focus on the claims that sentences make,
but it does make translating between English and FOL quite difficult.
It's one of the important skills that you'll learn in this course.
JOHN: There's one other aspect of conjunction in
English that we want to draw your attention to.
Consider the two sentences,
"Ewan fell asleep and Quinn went home."
And, "Quinn went home and Ewan fell asleep."
Now, these two sentences don't really mean the same thing in English.
The word "and" has a temporal component in these sentences.
In the first, you have the suggestion that first,
Ewan fell asleep and then later, Quinn went home.
But in the second case,
first Quinn went home,
and then Ewan went to sleep.
The order of the claims in the conjunction is
significant in English to the meaning of the sentence.
These two sentences are true in different circumstances.
DAVE: In logic, we're going to analyze all sentences as making claims about the world,
and we're going to analyze conjunctions as being
true if both of the claims that are conjoined are true.
In fact, our language of first order logic has the property that we will treat
all of the propositional connectives as being "truth functional".
JOHN: Now, this is a very important idea that
makes our language a lot simpler than it might otherwise be.
We use connectives to connect smaller claims together to make larger ones.
The idea of truth functionality is that we can determine the truth of
the larger claim by considering only the
connective and the truth of the smaller claims that it connects.
Specifically, in this, in the case of conjunction,
a conjunction will be true only if both of the smaller claims,
the conjuncts, are true.
It'll be false if either of the conjuncts are false.
DAVE: And this means that these two sentences about Ewan
falling asleep and Quinn going home will be considered equivalent.
They'll be true in situations in which Ewan did
fall asleep and in which Quinn did go home,
and false in any other situation.
We do not take into account the order in which things happen.
The only thing we can take into account when we work out the truth value of
a truth-functional conjunction are the truth values of the conjuncts,
and the fact that this is a conjunction.
JOHN: Now, that's what it means for a propositional connectives to be truth functional.
This is an assumption that we make in designing our language,
which makes a lot of things much simpler than they would be if we
tried to deal with the full richness of the English language.
[MUSIC]
