DAVE: When we assume that connectives are truth functional we get a really simple way to
describe when sentences are true. We can write a table that displays how the truth
values of the compound sentences depend on the truth values of the component sentences.
JOHN: So we'll begin by writing down the general form of a conjunction.
We write the conjunction symbol between its two conjuncts, and since it doesn't really matter
which sentences the conjunction conjoins, we'll just write "P" and "Q" to represent these sentences.
The truth value of the sentence "P and Q" depends on the truth values of the sentences "P" and "Q".
We'll write a table with a column for each of the sentences "P" and "Q" on the left and a column for the
compound sentence "P and Q" on the right. We'll call the columns for "P" and "Q" the "reference columns" and
the column for the main sentence the "target column", and we separate them with a double line.
DAVE: The idea is to describe how the truth value of the conjunction varies with the truth values of
the two conjuncts. Each row of our table displays a particular combination of truth values for "P" and "Q".
There are four different combinations. "P" and "Q" can both be true, "P" can be true and "Q"
false, "P" can be false and "Q" true or they can both be false. We write these possible combinations
in the four rows to the left of the double line. JOHN: Now, we can describe the truth values
of the conjunction in these four different kinds of situations. We said that a conjunction is true
only if both of its conjuncts are true. That's what conjunction really means. So in the first row, where
both "P" and "Q" are true, we know that the conjunction is true. In each of the other rows the conjunction
will be false, because at least one of the conjuncts is false in each of those rows.
DAVE: So this handy table completely describes the conditions under which a conjunction is true.
When we are given a conjunction, we can look at the truth value of its component sentences,
find the corresponding row of the truth table, and read off the truth value of the conjunction.
Now, you might want to make a copy of this table to keep. You might even like to get it tattooed
on your left forearm. JOHN: That's where my copy is. DAVE: But if you do make sure to leave room for some other
tables because we're going to see some more soon. You don't really need to keep a copy of the table
if you understand how it's constructed though. This table is constructed from four rows each of
which represents one of the four ways in which the truth values of the conjuncts can be true or false.
And the conjunction is true only in the row which makes both conjuncts true.
JOHN: There are a couple of more things to say here. One is that in all of the examples that we've
given, we've used conjunction to join together two atomic sentences. Now it's not necessary
that those sentences be atomic. Any sentence of FOL can play the role of the conjuncts.
Right now we only know about atomic sentences and conjunctions, but we're going to shortly expand our
repertory of connectives. Let's start by learning about the other Boolean connectives, disjunction
and negation. JOHN: Right so disjunction corresponds roughly to the word "or" in English. We can say
things like "Quinn is at home or Quinn is at the library". A sentence like this presents some
alternatives concerning ways in which the sentence can be true. Like the word "and" the word "or" can also
appear between nouns as in "Either Quinn or Ewan is at the ice cream store" and between properties
as in "Ewan is at the ice cream store or at the library". JOHN: And I'll bet I know where he is.
DAVE: Everything we said about this when we discussed conjunction also applies to the word "or". So
we're not going to labor the point. We'll just pretend that uses of disjunction link together
two sentences. But as we discussed before, you may have to do some work to get the English sentence
into this form before translating into FOL. JOHN: So we're going to use the symbol "v" to represent
disjunction. We'll call it either "v" or "or". If you want a handy way to remember how to
distinguish between the conjunction symbol and the disjunction symbol, then the conjunction symbol is
the one that kind of looks a lot like a capital "A" and that you can think of as a standing for "and".
DAVE: So let's skip to the part where we describe the semantics of disjunction using a truth table. Just
as before we build a table with reference columns for some sentences "P" and "Q" and on the target side
we write the abstract sentence "P v Q" ("P or Q"). Just as before, we write four rows representing the
possible combinations of the truth values of "P" and "Q". I think it's pretty clear, isn't it, that
a disjunction is definitely false if both of the disjuncts are false? The sentence "Quinn is at home
or Ewan is at the library" is definitely false if both of the disjuncts are false, perhaps because
they're at the ice cream store. And we expect the disjunction to be true if one of the disjuncts
are true. So we we know that in the middle two rows it's going to be true. But there's a question about
a situation in which both disjuncts are true. Is the disjunction true in this case or is it false?
DAVE: Well, when we think about how this works in English there are really two different uses of disjunction.
JOHN: For example, when the server tells us that we can have soup or salad with our meal then
we have a strong intuition that we can't have both. That's kind of the implication. We're being
asked to choose between two alternatives but the server is not saying that we can have both.
On the other hand, suppose that before Quinn gets home I say that he's either bought ice cream or
he's been to the candy store. I don't think you would say I was wrong if he arrives home with
both ice cream and candy. JOHN: So the evidence from English suggests that both uses are possible.
We call the first kind of disjunction "exclusive disjunction" because the truth of one disjunct
excludes the truth of the other if we're going to make a true statement. The other kind is
called the "inclusive disjunction". In this case a disjunction is true if both disjuncts are true
DAVE: So we're going to make a choice, and the choice is to put true in this row of the truth table. That
is we're making a choice that disjunction in FOL is inclusive. A disjunction will be true if either
or both disjuncts are true. JOHN: Now as we'll see later, this choice is essentially arbitrary.
We can still express exclusive disjunctions in the language of FOL. It's just going to require
a little more work. And if we had made the other choice, then we would have really not lost any
ability either. The set of things that we can say in our language would still be the same either way.
DAVE: The last Boolean connective is negation. Actually, calling it a connective is a little
misleading since it doesn't connect together many sentences. It just acts on a single sentence. We
say that conjunction and disjunction are "binary" connectives meaning they operate on two formulae,
while negation is a "unary" connective operating on just one. JOHN: There are actually
many ways of expressing a negation in English but the most obvious is to use the word "not".
When we say a sentence like "Ewan is not at home", we mean to claim that the sentence "Ewan is at home"
is false. Negation serves to reverse the truth value of the claim that we're making.
DAVE: Now notice that the word "not" in this sentence is embedded within the sentence. It looks like it's
part of the predicate or property of this sentence. We could however rephrase the sentence as "it is
not the case that Ewan is at home" which makes it clear that the component sentence is "Ewan is at
home" while the operation "it is not the case that" is being applied to that sentence to negate it.
JOHN: In FOL, we use the symbol "not", "negation", and we always write the symbol in front of the sentence
that we're negating. So this is the symbol that looks like a little line with a hook at the end.
DAVE: Sometimes you'll hear people say it is not the case that..." in otherwise normal English.
When you do, you can be pretty sure that the person has studied logic because normal people
don't say things like that. JOHN: There are other ways to express negation in English. A sentence like
"Quinn is unhappy" might be taken to mean that "Quinn is not happy" or "it is not the
case that Quinn is happy". So the use of the prefix "un-" can often signal a use of negation.
DAVE: Although perhaps there is a difference between being unhappy and not being happy, but for the
purposes of this example we'll assume that everyone is either happy or not, and that
unhappy is the negation of happy. The truth table for negation is very straightforward.
First, there's just one sentence on the reference side "P"
say, and the formula "not P" written with this symbol the line with the tail on it on the target side.
There are just two choices for the truth value of "P", true and false. So the table has just two rows,
and "not P" is false in the row where "P" is true and it's true in the row where "P" is false. JOHN: Another way
in which negation is subtle in english is when we use two negations in a sentence. We call this
"double negation". If you were to say that "Quinn is not unhappy" then this is a use of double negation.
In everyday English, this does not imply that "Quinn is happy" but rather something different.
Perhaps he's indifferent although we may have expected him to be unhappy.
DAVE: Well sometimes you hear people saying things like "it doesn't make no difference"
which means "it doesn't make a difference" which just has one negation.
The first time Elvis Presley went into the recording studio he was asked who he sounded like,
his response was "Man, i don't sound like nobody". i think that the intention here is to say that his
sound is unique, not that he sounds like anybody. In uses like this, the double negation in English
serves as an intensifier to really emphasize the point. In logic though, far from intensifying the
effect, the second negation just has the effect of canceling out the first one. "It is not the
case that it is not the case that Quinn is at home" just says the same thing as "Quinn is at home".
These three connectives, conjunction , disjunction, and negation,
are the Boolean connectives. Each is used to make a more complex sentence out of smaller sentences.
We've seen how the truth values of the larger sentences can be worked out from the truth values
of the smaller ones. The only things that we take into consideration are the truth values of these
component sentences and the connective used. We call these connectives truth functional.
