[MUSIC] DAVE: Welcome back. I'm Dave.
JOHN: And I'm John.
DAVE: In this video, we're going to investigate
equivalences that hold between first-order sentences.
Just as in propositional logic,
first-order logic provides us with different ways to say the same thing.
If you understand how different formulae relate to one another,
then you'll obtain a firm understanding of the semantics of first-order sentences.
In addition, when presented with a sentence in one form,
you'll find that translating it into an equivalent form can
help you simplify it and then understand what it says more directly.
JOHN: We'll be considering equivalences of a couple of types.
One type helps us explore the relationships
between the quantifiers and the propositional connectives.
An example of this is to ask what happens when you negate a quantified formula?
The other type investigates the properties of
quantifiers and the relationship between quantifiers.
We've already seen that adjacent quantifiers of the same type can actually be exchanged.
But the quantifiers of different types can't in general be exchanged.
DAVE: We'll use the equivalences we learned about to
define a new normal form for quantified formulae.
Like CNF from propositional logic,
"prenex normal form" defines a standard format for quantified formulae.
Every first order formula is equivalent to one in prenex normal form.
Sometimes, investigating the prenex form can make
the truth conditions of a complex quantified sentence clearer.
JOHN: Finally, in this class,
we'll investigate a final class of formulas that we've called Tarskis World truths.
We've mentioned these before,
but we're now in a position to describe exactly how to
tell whether a formula is a Tarskis World truth.
We'll be getting to that later,
but let's turn our attention to quantifier equivalences.
DAVE: Let's start our discussion of equivalences involving
the quantifiers by considering what happens when we negate a quantified sentence.
JOHN: For example, consider the sentence,
"not for all x Cube(x)".
This sentence says that "it is not the case that every object is a cube" or more
colloquially, that "not everything is a cube".
DAVE: What would the world look like if the sentence were true?
Well they would have to be some object in the world that does not satisfy "Cube(x)",
since then for "all x Cube(x)" would be false and the negation would be true.
So this sentence is true if some object does not satisfy "Cube(x)".
That is, if there's some object in the world that is not a cube.
JOHN: Aha. We have another way of saying
that there is some object in the world that is not a cube,
namely, "there is an x, not Cube(x)".
DAVE: We sure do. This sentence too is true just
in case there is an object in the world which fails to satisfy "Cube(x)".
That object satisfies "not Cube(x)" and
therefore makes the existentially quantified formula true.
JOHN: Right. So let's do some experimentation with
the Tarski's World application to convince ourselves that this is actually true.
In this file, we have the two sentences that we have just been discussing.
Let's see if it's possible to build a world in which one of the sentences is true,
but the other is false.
If we can, then they're obviously not equivalent.
DAVE: Let's start by looking at this world in which all the blocks are cubes.
In this world, the first sentence is false.
Everything is a cube, so the claim that "not everything is a cube" must be false.
Notice though, that the second sentence is also false.
To be true, it would require that some object is not a cube,
and there are no such objects.
JOHN: Okay. So let's change one of the cubes into a dodecahedron.
This should make the second sentence true.
Now there is an object that satisfies "not Cube(x)".
Sure enough, the second sentence is true now,
and so is the first.
It says that "not everything is a cube",
and now that's true.
What about if there are no cubes in the world.
Suppose we changed them all to some other shape.
DAVE: Well in this case, both of these sentences are true again.
We still haven't managed to find a world in which one is
true and the other's false. I'm very gullible.
So I'm going to declare myself convinced by
this experiment that these two sentences are equivalent.
JOHN: If you feel like you need to be further convinced,
then please experiment more with Tarskis World to see if you can construct
a world in which one of these sentences is true while the other is false.
DAVE: Of course, the use of the "Cube" predicate here is for
the purposes of illustration what we've actually shown is that
for any property "P", "not for all x P(x)" is equivalent to
"there exists x not P(x)". That's our first equivalence involving the quantifiers.
JOHN: Okay. So now let's look at another closely related equivalence.
"Not there is an x,
P(x)" is in fact,
logically equivalent to "for all x not P(x)".
This is just like the first except that
the existential and universal quantifiers have changed place.
DAVE: Again, let's think about what it would take for the left-hand side to be true.
This says that the formula "there exists x P(x)" is false,
which requires no object satisfies the property "P". But this is just the same as saying,
every object satisfies "not P",
and that's exactly what the right-hand formula says.
JOHN: So let's add instances of these two sentences to our Tarskis World sentences.
This time let's use "Small" as the predicate for variety.
Evaluating these two sentences in this world shows that they're both false.
So why is that?
Well, the first sentence says that "there is no small object".
This clearly false since there is a small tetrahedron.
The second sentence says that every object satisfies "not Small(x)".
This is clearly false since a small tetrahedron
satisfies "Small(x)" and so fails to satisfy "not Small(x)".
DAVE: Well, what about the case in which there are no small objects?
Let's make that small tetrahedron, large.
Now, both of our sentences are true.
Everything satisfies "not Small(x)" making the second sentence true.
But now of course there's no small objects,
so the first sentence is true too.
We're going to declare this an equivalence too.
Again, if you're not convinced,
please play with Tarskis World some more and see
whether you can make the sentences have different truth values.
If you can, let us know.
JOHN: We encourage you to use Tarskis World software to test out pairs of
formulas as we introduce new quantifier equivalences.
Remember, playing with the game can often be informative as well.
The sharp eyed among you may have noticed that we named
this sentence- the sentence is file, "de Morgan's Sentences".
Remember de Morgan's laws that we discussed in propositional logic?
They were the laws that said "not parenthesis P and Q" is equivalent to "not P or not Q",
and "not parenthesis P or Q" is equivalent to "not P and not Q".
Each of these rules has a formula with an outermost negation on
the left and is equivalent to a formula with the scope of the negation reduced,
pushed inside so to speak,
the connective switches between conjunction and disjunction.
DAVE: Well the first-order equivalence is that we've just introduced have a similar form.
The scope of the negation is reduced from left to right,
and the quantifier switches type.
It turns out that there's a very close relationship between
the universal quantifier and conjunction in propositional logic.
One way to easily see this is to think of
a universal sentence like "for all x Cube(x)" as
saying "this object is a cube and
this object is a cube and this object is a cube" and so on.
Similarly, a formula such as "there is an x,
Cube(x)" says that "either this object is a cube
or that object is a cube or that object is a cube" and so on.
So there's a similar close relationship
between the existential quantifier and disjunction.
DAVE: So one way to think about these equivalencies that we've just
introduced is as De Morgan's laws for quantifiers.
This helps to remember what they say and this connection
between the quantifiers and Boolean connectives will appear again.
One consequence of these first-order equivalences is that we can see
immediately that there's going to be a negation normal form for first-order logic.
JOHN: Recall that a sentence is in negation normal form if
any negation symbols are attached only to atomic formulas.
In propositional logic, we showed how to push the negation symbol inside
Boolean connectives using the De Morgan's laws and double negation.
With the addition of De Morgan's laws for quantifiers,
we can see how to reduce the scope of negation symbols that fall outside the quantifiers.
And so we can still obtain a negation normal form in first-order logic.
DAVE: Incidentally, notice that the De Morgan's laws for
quantifiers also immediately allows us to
notice that we don't need both the universal and existential quantifiers in our language.
Since "not for all x P(x)" is equivalent to "exist x not P(x)".
Then putting the negation symbol on the other side,
"for all x P(x)" is equivalent to "not there exist x not P(x)".
So any expression involving a universal quantifier has
an equivalent sentence that uses only the existential quantifier.
JOHN: And importantly, a couple of negations.
Now, of course, the other De Morgan equivalence can be used to show that we can
dispense with the existential quantifier and only
use the universal quantifier if we wanted to.
Once again, we think that the language with
two quantifiers allows us to better preserve the structure of
English sentences when translating into FOL so we want to have both of these.
But it is important to understand that we don't
get added expressive power by adding two of them,
we could get rid of either one of them.
DAVE: Now, let's turn our attention to how the quantifier symbols interact
with the Boolean conjunction and disjunction connectives.
Look at these two sentences.
This equivalence between "for all x (Small(x) and
Cube(x))" and "for all x Small(x) and for all x Cube(x)" on the other hand.
The left-hand sentence of this path says that every object is a small cube.
Every object satisfies the property "Small(x) and Cube(x)".
If all of the objects are small cubes then every object is small
and every object is a cube which is what the right-hand sentence of the pair says.
JOHN: In general, if every object has both of the pair of properties "P" and "Q",
then every object has the property "P" and every object has the property "Q" and vice versa.
So we have for "all x (P(x) and Q(x))" is logically equivalent
to "for all x P(x) and for all x Q(x)".
If some object is not a small cube making the left-hand side false,
then it is because either that object is not small or because it's not a cube.
In this case, one of the conjuncts on the right-hand side will be false.
Either not everything is a cube or not everything is
small and so the right-hand conjunction will be false too.
DAVE: I like to think of this as the universal quantifier plays nice with conjunction.
Sadly the situation with disjunction is not as nice.
Consider these pair of sentences,
"for all x (Small(x) or Cube(x))" and "for all x Small(x) or for all x Cube(x)".
This is exactly the same with conjunction replaced by disjunction.
The first says that every object is either small or is a cube.
But if this sentence is true,
it doesn't mean that the second sentence is true.
It isn't necessarily the case that either everything is small or everything is a cube.
JOHN: So let's think about these sentences.
The first sentence can be true in a world in which some objects are
small and then the remainder of the objects are cubes.
But this isn't enough to make the second sentence true.
So let's modify our world to look like that.
DAVE: Okay. So in this world, we've got two cubes and one small object, the tetrahedron,
JOHN: Okay. So you can see that the first sentence is
true and the second one turns out to be false.
Every object in the world is either a cube or it's small but it isn't
the case that everything is a cu- cube
and it's not the case either that everything is small.
DAVE: Interestingly, if we build a world in which the second sentence is
true then the first sentence will be true too.
For example, if everything is a cube,
then everything is a cube sentence six here is
true because of the ri- right-hand disjunct is true
but also sentence five is true too because every object
satisfies the disjunction at least by being a cube.
So although these sentences are not equivalent,
the formula with the narrow scoped quantifiers,
the ones with the disjunction on the outside,
does imply the formula with
the wider scope quantifier with the disjunction inside the quantifier.
JOHN: The situation with the existential quantifier is similar.
Although, as you might expect with a conjunction and disjunction, symbols exchanged.
So for example, "there is an x,
(Small(x) or Cube(x))" is equivalent to
either" there is something that's small or there is something that's a cube".
This equivalence does hold.
DAVE: Right. If some object is either small or is
a cube then some object is small or some object is a cube.
To see this, let's imagine that the left-hand sentence is true.
This sentence is true if there's some object in the world,
let's call it "Julia" which is either a cube or is small.
Let's suppose that Julia is small.
Well Julia will satisfy "Small(x)" and so
there "exists x Small(x)" will be true making the right-hand formula true.
Of course, if Julia is a cube that's not small then the second disjunct will be true.
JOHN: And Julia must be one or the other, otherwise,
she would not satisfy the left-hand side in the fi- in the first place.
A similar argument which you should try to construct will show that if
the right-hand side is true then the left-hand side must be true too.
Together they show that the two formulas are equivalent.
Again, there's nothing special about the properties "Small" and "Cube" here.
We can- we can express equivalence as "there is an x parenthesis P(x) or Q(x)"
is logically equivalent to" there is an x P(x) or there is an x Q(x)".
DAVE: Now, the final case, which is also bad,
where we have an existential quantifier and
the conjunction connective consider is- this pair of sentences,
for example, "there exist x,
(Small(x) and Cube(x))" and the sentence "there is a Small(x) and there is a Cube(x)".
Suppose the world has two objects,
one is a small dodecahedron and the other is a large cube.
This world contains no small cubes,
so the first of these sentences is false.
However, there is a small object and there is a cube,
so the second sentence is true.
JOHN: So let's see that in Tarski's World.
Okay, here we have that world,
and when I play the game with the second sentence and a commitment to
true and Tarski's World chooses
a conjunct and I'm asked to choose a witness to make the conjunct true,
and I can do that easily whichever conjunct Tarski's World selects.
DAVE: So, for example, in this play of the game Tarski's World has selected the conjunct.
"there exists x Small(x)" and we're being asked to pick an object that is small,
so we can pick the dodecahedron and that we would succeed.
Had Tarski's World picked the other disjunct,
we would have been asked to pick an object that's a cube,
and again, we would've been able to succeed.
JOHN: So no problem, we're going to win.
Now, if I play with the first sentence and I commit to true,
Tarski's World is going to ask us to choose a small cube.
DAVE: That's right.
JOHN: And while I tried to do that,
I'm out of luck.
DAVE: It's gonna be difficult because there is no small cube,
there's a small thing than a cube but nothing that satisfies both properties.
But just as in the other case,
if the first sentence is true,
if there is a small cube,
then surely there is both a small thing and a cube.
We can choose the sma- the small cube as the witness for either of the conjuncts.
So in this case again,
the formula are not equivalent but one implies the other.
We have- if there exist an x that's both "P" and "Q",
then there exist "P" and there exist some object that is "Q".
JOHN: There are a couple of really simple quantifier equivalences
that we want to cover before we close this video.
The first is a little odd but it turns out that it is quite important.
It concerns a situation in which the variable of
quantification does not occur in the scope of the quantifier.
DAVE: A simple example is this formula.
"there exist an x Cube(b)".
JOHN: Huh, that's a surprise.
DAVE: Yeah, there are no free occurrences of
the variable "x" in the formula inside the quantifier.
As John said, this is an odd sentence,
but it is a first order sentence according to our rules.
The rule for placing a quantifier in front of a formula doesn't
require that the variable following the quantifier occurs anywhere inside that formula.
JOHN: And what's more, this formula is even a sentence since it contains no free variables.
So how do we determine whether this formula is true?
Well, we need to work out if every object in the domain satisfies the formula "Cube(b)".
Suppose that I have a tetrahedron in the domain named "Julian",
remember Julia from just now? This is her brother.
So the first step in determining whether Julian satisfies the formula is to substitute
every occurrence of "x" in the formula "Cube(b)" with the name Julian.
But when we do that, we obtain the formula "Cube(b)" since there's no occurrence of "x".
DAVE: So Julian satisfies "Cube(b)" just in case the sentence "Cube(b)" is true,
and obviously, that sentence is true just in case b is a cube.
So suppose that b is a cube,
then Julian satisfies "Cube(b)" and so there's an object satisfying "Cube(b)" and,
therefore, "there exist Cube(b)" is true.
JOHN: Obviously, the only thing that determines whether
Julian satisfies "Cube(b)" is whether "b" is a cube or not.
If it is, then Julian, or any other object for that matter, satisfies the formula.
If "b" is not a cube,
then no object will satisfy this formula.
What this means is that "there is an x Cube(b)" is equivalent to "Cube(b)" or more generally,
that "there is an x P" is logically equivalent to "P" if "P" doesn't contain "x" free.
The quantifier does not- does no work in such a formula.
DAVE: And a similar argument will lead to the other equivalence "for
all x P" is equivalent to "P" if "P" doesn't contain "x" free.
Again, if "P" is true,
then every object will satisfy "P" and so "for all x P" will be true.
If "P" is false,
then no object will satisfy "P" and the universal formula will be false.
We call this Vacuous Quantification.
JOHN: This probably seems like a weird fact that is true but might be useless.
But it turns out that it is actually
a quite important fact and one that we will exploit in the next video.
So file it away for the moment and we'll come back to it.
DAVE: Another equivalence between first-order sentences is probably more intuitive.
It says that the choice of the name of
the bound variable in a quantified formula is arbitrary.
For example, these two sentences are equivalent "for all x Cube(x)" and "for all y Cube(y)".
JOHN: Right. So intuitively, the purpose of a variable is to associate
a quantifier with a corresponding spots in the formula.
The particular choice of variable that we use
for this purpose really doesn't make any difference.
So we can read this rule is allowing us to change
the variable of quantification to whatever we would like,
but, as is usually true,
there's a slight wrinkle to this rule,
which concerns the choice of the new variable that we might
want to use when we change the name of the variable.
DAVE: We must make sure that the variable that we choose as
the new variable name is not already being used in the sentence.
For example, consider the sentence "for all x there exist y not SameSize(x,y)".
For all objects, there is an object that's not the same size as it.
It would be true, for example,
if there were two objects one large and one small.
JOHN: Now it's all- it's perfectly okay to
change this sentence to be "for all z there is a y,
such that not SameSize(z,y)" changing the variable from "x" to "z".
This sentence has the same meaning as before,
but notice, it isn't correct to change the "x" to "y".
We can't change this formula to "for all y there is a y,
such that not SameSize(y,y)".
DAVE: In this case, the new variable that we chose,
"y", was already in use in the sentence.
The problem is that when we made this change,
the quantifier associated with the variable "x" is changed.
In the original sentence,
the occurrence in the first argument position of the
predicate is associated with the universal quantifier.
But in this new form,
the variable that used to be "x" is bound by the existential quantifier
because it's the quantifier with the smallest scope using the variable "y".
JOHN: In fact, the universal quantifier does not have the chance to bind fair-
the variable "y" because it's been bound by the existential quantifier.
This is an example of the situation that we just discussed,
where a quantifier dominates a formula that does not contain any of its variable free.
DAVE: As we saw,
sentences like this are equivalent to the formula inside the vacuous quantifier.
In this case, "for all y,
there exist y not SameSize(y,y)".
It's just equivalent to "there exist y not SameSize(y,y)",
we can drop the universal quantifier.
This second sentence says that "there's
some object that is not the same size as itself",
a sentence which clearly can't be true in any world.
Since our original sentence could be true in some world and this sentence can't,
these sentences are not equivalent.
JOHN: So the moral of the story is that it's
okay to change the variable associated with a quantifier,
provided the new variable that you choose is not already in use in the sentence.
If you use a new variable,
the result will be equivalent to the original.
But if you use a variable that is in use,
then you run the risk of producing a new sentence,
which is not equivalent to the original.
[MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
