JOHN: When we studied propositional logic,
we introduced the notion of a normal form for sentences.
In particular, we talked about negation normal form,
conjunctive normal form, CNF and disjunctive normal form DNF.
We discussed how it can sometimes be convenient to put
sentences into normal forms like CNF and DNF,
because this can make the truth conditions for the sentence
easier to understand.
DAVE: We're going to introduce a new kind of normal form in this video.
This form is called "prenex normal form".
Once again, the goal of putting a sentence into this normal form
will make the truth conditions of the sentence easier to understand.
A sentence is in prenex normal form,
if none of the quantifiers are within the scope of a propositional connective.
Or to put it another way,
the sentence consists of a string of quantifiers at the beginning.
And these quantifiers all apply to a single formula which
itself contains no quantifiers.
JOHN: Actually it's an interesting fact about first-order sentences.
That you can measure their complexity by the number of times the quantifiers in
the prenex- in the prefix switch between universal and existential
and back again.
These are so-called quantifier alternations.
A sentence that has only existential or only universal quantifiers,
contains no alternations.
If there's a string of existential quantifiers
followed by a string of universal quantifiers,
and then the main formula,
then it has one alternation and so on.
DAVE: So we're not going to talk about this idea further.
The focus of this video,
is to show that any sentence can be placed into prenex normal form.
This process uses the quantifier equivalences that
we discussed in the previous video.
We'll be using these equivalences so that we
increase the scope of each quantifier every time we use one.
So that eventually, all of the quantifiers are
outside the scope of all of the propositional connectives.
JOHN: Now, as we did in propositional logic,
we're going to assume that we've gotten rid of
all the conditional connectives in favor of their Boolean equivalents.
This means that we just have to worry about the relationships
between the quantifiers and the Boolean connectives.
We learned enough equivalences last time to cover all these cases.
DAVE: So a sentence that is not in prenex normal form has
at least one occurrence of
a quantifier symbol within the scope of a propositional connective.
We're going to say that those quantifiers are "out of place".
Now, there may be many quantifiers that are out of place,
and our procedure is simpler if we choose among these quantifiers carefully.
JOHN: Our procedure is to choose a quantifier that's out of place but which
is not in the scope of another quantifier which is out of place.
So the quantifier we choose is not in
the prefix because it's in the scope of a propositional connective.
But in addition, it's not in the scope of another quantifier,
unless those quantifiers are in the prefix.
DAVE: So let's be clear about this.
Let's look at this schematic formula where each of the "Q" are
quantifiers and the ellipses represent fragments of the formula.
In this formula, the quantifiers associated with "v" and "w" are in the prefix.
We're going to leave them alone.
They're in place.
JOHN: The remaining quantifiers though are all out of place.
Now, notice that "Qy" is inside the scope of "Qx".
This is not a quantifier that we can choose because "Qx" is itself out of place.
The other two quantifiers are just in the scope of the prefix.
And so we can choose either of those to work on.
DAVE: The reason we want to choose a quantifier like this
is that we can gradually move it towards the prefix.
Every time we move it up,
it will either be in the scope of a new propositional connective.
Or- or it will have reached the prefix.
It will never bump into another quantifier that is also out of place.
We will do this repeatedly,
until none of the quantifiers are in the scope of a connective.
That is until the sentence is in prenex normal form.
JOHN: We're going to consider each of the propositional connectives
in turn and think about the rule that
we'll- that we'll use to increase the scope of
the quantifier when it's dominated by that kind of connective.
The case for negation is easiest of course.
If we have a quantifier immediately in the scope of a negation symbol,
then we know that we can use De Morgan's Laws for that quantifier.
DAVE: So if a universal quantifier is within the immediate scope of a negation symbol,
then we can use the first De Morgan's Law to increase
the scope of the quantifier.
The formula on the right has
the existential quantifier outside the scope of the negation.
If this occurrence of "not for
all x P(x)" is the most deeply nested quantifier that's out of place,
then the formula "for all x P(x)" is in prenex normal form.
But the whole formula is not because of the negation symbol.
After applying the rule,
the whole formula is in prenex form.
Since "P(x)" contains no misplaced quantifiers and now,
the existential quantifier is now well-placed.
DAVE: Of course, if you have an existential quantifier within the scope of a negation,
then you can use the second De Morgan law. This is going well.
There are three propositional connectives and we've already
handled one of them.
So we're a third of the way there.
Unfortunately though the conjunction and
disjunction connectives are not quite so easy to deal with.
JOHN: Still it's not too difficult,
provided you remember the equivalences that we've already discussed.
You might expect that we're going to use the equivalences involving
conjunction and disjunction that we discussed in the last video.
DAVE: But we actually won't use these exclusively.
It's the change of bound variable and vacuous quantification rules
that we will use most of all. The reason is simple.
First, two of these rules are not equivalences and
can't be used to modify our formula to get a new equivalent formula.
And the second is that the two equivalences only apply in a very special case.
Namely, when both of the subformally are universally quantified.
Or when both are existentially quantified.
In general, we need to be able to lift a quantifier over a conjunction for example,
when the other formula is not known to be a quantified formula.
JOHN: So having established what we're not going to do,
let's investigate what we are going to do.
Let's suppose that our formula looks like this.
"for all x P(x) and Q".
There's a universal quantifier in the scope of a conjunction symbol.
So this formula is not in prenex form.
DAVE: Now suppose the "Q" is free of the variable "x".
That is it contains no free occurrences of "x".
Then" "Q is equivalent to "for all x Q".
Because of the strange vacuous quantification rule that we talked about.
So now we have the formula,
"for all x P(x) and for all x Q".
And we're gonna apply the rule governing universal quantifiers and conjunction.
To obtain "for all x (P(x) and Q)".
And now, the universal quantifier is outside of the scope of the conjunction.
JOHN: But what if "Q" is not free of "x"?
Suppose "Q" contains- actually contains some free occurrences of "x".
In this case, we can't slap the quantifier on and just go on blithely.
So the formula looks something like this,
"for all x P(x) and Q(x)",
with "Q(x)" signaling that "Q" contains "x" free.
There's some quantifier outside this subformula must bind these free "x"'s.
Now, notice, of course,
that the "x"'s in "Q(x)" are not bound by the quantifier that you can see,
but by a quantifier with the whole conjunction in it's scope.
DAVE: Right. We can't forge on blithely or otherwise.
However, we can do something a little sneaky.
JOHN: And I like sneaky.
DAVE: Well, you'll like this then. We can rename
the bound variable and the quantified formula "for all x P(x)"
to be something different.
If we use a variable that's not free in "Q",
then we'll be able to go ahead just as we did before.
So for example, we change the quantified formula to
be in the variable "z", "for all z P(z),
and Q(x)".
And then we can go ahead and get "for all z and,
uh, the conjunction P(z) and Q(x)",
with the larger scope for the quantifier.
JOHN: Okay. That is really sneaky.
So we have to be careful how we choose the new bound variable though.
Remember that the new bound variable shouldn't be free in "Q(x)",
so that we can include "Q(x)" in its scope.
Also, the new bound variable should not be free in "P(x)" either.
Remember that this is a condition on the rule
for renaming bound variables whenever you do it.
DAVE: So the result of this is that we have shown that we can increase
the scope of the quantifier when there is
a conjunction dominating the universal quantifier.
By the way, the fact that conjunction and disjunction are commutative,
mean that we don't have to separately consider the case
where the quantified formula is the second conjunct.
JOHN: So to recap the general rule,
when you have a formula like one of these "for all x P(x) and Q",
you transform it first to "for all z P(z) and Q" where "Q" is free of "z".
And then widen the scope of the quantifier to get "for all z parentheses,
P(z) and Q".
If "Q" doesn't contain "x" free,
then you can skip the first step completely.
DAVE: Now, here's the interesting thing.
The very same procedure works,
whatever combination of quantifier and connective you have.
If you have a universal quantifier and conjunction,
a universal quantifier and disjunction,
or an existential quantifier with either disjunction or conjunction,
the procedure works in every case.
A combination of the vacuous quantification rule and
the bound variable renaming rule,
allows us to lift quantifiers of either type over both conjunction and disjunction.
JOHN: And the De Morgan's Laws for quantifiers allow us to lift quantifiers over negations,
and so we can put any formula into prenex normal form.
DAVE: Let's put this together by showing how to work an example,
putting a complex formula into prenex form.
Here's our example.
"There exists x P(x) implies,
there exists y Q(y)".
JOHN: Okay. So the first thing to notice is that the formula contains a material conditional,
and we'll remove that by using its definition
in terms of the Boolean connectives.
So what we're going to get is,
"it's not the case that there is an x P(x) or there is a y Q(y)".
Now, notice that both quantifiers are out of place.
We're going to arbitrarily choose
the quantifier in the scope of the negation symbol first.
We can use the Morgan's Laws to move this negation symbol
inside the scope to obtain "for all x not P(x),
or there is a y Q(y)".
Now, both of the quantifiers are in the scope of the disjunction.
Let's choose to do the existential quantifier first for no particular reason.
Notice that the left disjunct has no free occurrences of "y".
And so we can just go ahead and expand its scope to obtain,
"there exists y parentheses for all x not P(x) or Q(y)".
And now the final step,
the disjunct "Q(y)" is free of "x",
and so we can lift the quantifier over the disjunction.
And we get, "there is a y for all x parentheses not P(x) or Q(y)".
And now we have the formula in prenex normal form.
We could have treated the two disjuncts in either order.
And if we had, we would have gotten
a superficially different formula with
the existential and universal quantifiers switched.
JOHN: In general, you can't switch
a universal and existential quantifier and maintain equivalence.
But with this formula, you can because of the pattern
of occurrences of the variables in the embedded formula.
Incidentally, this shows that it's possible, and indeed common,
for a formula to be equivalent to many different sentences in prenex form.
DAVE: Now that we've gotten our feet wet,
let's look at a more complex example.
Here we have the formula, uh,
"it's not the case that in parentheses,
there exists x P(x) or R(b)
or for all x in parentheses P(x) and there exists x Q(x)".
JOHN: Notice that this formula has three quantifiers,
and they all have the variable "x" associated with them.
It's pretty clear that we'll have trouble unless we do some renaming.
The quantified formula, "there is an x Q(x)",
is within the scope of a larger quantifier,
and so we can't choose to work on it first.
Neither of the other two quantifiers have
this problem and so we could choose to work on either one of them.
We're going to start with the other existential quantifier.
DAVE: Now, that quantifier is in the scope of a disjunction connective.
But fortunately, the second disjunct does not contain the variable "x",
and so we can immediately increase the scope
of the quantifier using vacuous quantification.
We will obtain this new formula.
"It's not the case that there exists x in parentheses P(x) or R(b)
Or for all x in parentheses P(x),
and there exists x Q(x)".
JOHN: Now, this quantifier is immediately in the scope of the negation symbol,
and so we can use De Morgan's laws to fix that problem,
so then we get "for all x not parentheses P(x),
or R(b),
or the rest of the formula".
DAVE: Now, continuing to work with the same quantifier.
It's now immediately in the scope of the top-level disjunction.
Notice that the right-hand disjunct has no free occurrences of "x".
This is easy to spot because that formula is
headed by a universal quantifier associated with "x",
and it therefore binds all of occurrences of "x" in that formula.
The result of that observation is that we can use
the vacuous quantification rules to lift
the leftmost universal quantifier over the disjunction symbol.
It is now part of the prefix, and we're done with it.
Then we have the formula "for all x in parentheses not P(x) or R(b),
or for all x P(x),
and there exists x Q(x)".
JOHN: Okay. So one quantifier down and we have two left to go.
Next, we have to deal with the other universal quantifier.
It's immediately in the scope of a disjunction symbol.
And this time, the left disjunct contains the variable "x" free.
That left disjunct is "not parentheses P(x) or R(b)".
So we need to rename this quantifier.
Since "x" is the only variable free in the antecedent,
we can pick any other variable that we like.
I'm going to choose "y".
DAVE: Very creative.
JOHN: Why, thank you.
DAVE: So renaming that variable to "y" gives us the new formula,
"for all x in parentheses not P(x) or R(b),
or for all y P(y),
and there exists x Q(x)".
And we can now lift that universal quantifier over
this disjunction since the left disjunct is free of "y".
The resulting formula "for all x, for all y,
open parentheses not P(x) or R(b),
or P(y),
and thereexists x Q(x)".
JOHN: Okay. So we're almost done,
now we can deal with the existential quantifier
since it's the only quantifier that is out of place.
It's dominated by the conjunction symbol,
and the other conjunct is free of "x".
So we can just lift the quantifier over the conjunction,
that gives us "for all x, for all y,
parentheses not P(x) or R(b),
or there is an x P(y) and Q(x)".
DAVE: In the final step, we need to lift
the existential quantifier over the disjunction connective.
Again, "x" is free in the left disjunct,
so we will need to rename the variable.
"y" isn't a choice this time since
the formula inside the existential quantifier contains "y" free.
So I'm gonna choose-
JOHN: And let me guess.
DAVE: Go ahead.
JOHN: z?.
DAVE: No, John, I'm going to choose "v".
JOHN: What a dumb choice.
[LAUGHTER] Okay.
DAVE: So we get the new formula, "for all x,
for all y in parentheses",
and the left disjunct is "not P(x) or R(b)".
And the right disjunct is, "there exists v open parentheses P(y) and Q(v)".
And now we can lift the existential quantifier
over this disjunction to obtain the final formula.
JOHN: Ta-da.
DAVE: "For all x, for all y,
there exists a v", and then this whole formula, uh,
now propositional, "not P(x) or R(b),
or P(y) and Q(v)".
In fact, one more thing that you might notice.
And that is that the embedded formula is of the form "not P or Q",
and we can replace this with
the implication that was originally in the sentence when we started.
If we do that, we get "for all x, for all y,
there is a v parentheses P(x) or R(b) implies P(y) and Q(v)". [MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
