[MUSIC] DAVE: We've spent a lot of
time in this class talking about logical truth and related ideas.
Early in the class,
we contrasted logical truths with
tautologies on the one hand and with Tarski's World truths on the other.
JOHN: In this video, we're going to return to the notion of Tarski's.
World truths and about exactly what we mean when we describe this class of sentences.
DAVE: So the basic idea behind Tarski's World truths is that these sentences are
true in every world that you can build using the Tarski's World application.
Now, obviously, every logical truth is a Tarski's World truth.
That's because a logical truth is true in
every possible situation and worlds are logically possible situations.
JOHN: Of course, this tells us that every tautology and
every first-order validity is also true in every world,
so these are Tarski's World truths.
But there are some sentences that are true in
every world that are not necessarily logical truths,
an example of this is the sentence, "for all x,
x is either at Tet or a cube or a dodec".
DAVE: Now this sentence is obviously true in every world.
The only kinds of objects in Tarski's World are tetrahedra, cubes, and dodecahedra.
But in some logically possible situations, for example,
the actual world, there are other kinds of objects including crucially people.
So this sentence isn't logically true.
This tells us that the set of
Tarski's World truths is bigger than the set of logical truths.
JOHN: This is the opposite of the situation with tautologies and first order validities.
These sets are included in the set of logical truths but they omit some.
DAVE: Now, our goal in this video is to say exactly how the set
of Tarski's World truths is related to these other sets.
In particular, to the set of first order validities.
JOHN: The key observation is that worlds are logically
possible situations that have additional features.
These features strongly constrain the worlds to be a particular way.
For example, to contain only cubes, tetrahedra, dodecahedra.
The sentences that are true in every world are sentences that must be true in
any situation that meets these additional constraints.
Because these constraints limit the kinds of situations that are under consideration,
the number of truths is much larger than for situations in general.
DAVE: So when we are saying that the sentence is a Tarski's World truth,
what we're saying is,
it's true whenever these additional constraints hold.
If we could describe these constraints for example as a set of first-order sentences,
then we will have another characterization of Tarski's World truths.
Tarski's World truths are just the sentences that are
first-order consequences of these additional sentences describing how worlds must be.
Logicians have a name for this kind of sentence that prescribes how a world must be,
we call them "axioms".
JOHN: So one way to think about the axioms is that they provide
meanings to the predicates or at least facts about the predicate which must hold,
and these facts hold of the predicates as they are used in Tarski's World.
DAVE: So if you think about the procedure for determining first-order consequence,
we're allowed to interpret the predicates under consideration in any way we want to.
When we add the additional axioms as background assumptions,
we're saying that we're only going to consider
situations in which these sentences are true and
that means we limit the number of different situations
we're considering when we look for a counter-example.
JOHN: These additional axioms are background assumptions.
When we say that every world makes some sentence true, we're saying that,
provided the situation meets these additional assumptions then the sentence must be true.
These additional assumptions are just the rules of the game that we presented to
you when we first described the nature of the worlds constructed in Tarski's World.
So a sentence is a TW-truth,
at Tarski's world truth, just in case,
it's a consequence of the axioms that describe what Tarski's worlds are like.
DAVE: Now, there's nothing special about axioms.
They are just first-order sentences.
But we use them to describe particular classes of
situations that we're interested in at a particular point of time.
JOHN: Now this is a quite general idea.
If you wanted to describe the world of astronomy,
you might have axioms that say that everything is either a star, a planet,
a moon or a black hole say and another axiom might
say that any object orbiting a planet is a moon and so on.
Then you might look at all of the sentences that are
true given these background assumptions and
come up with the class of astronomical truths or astronomy truths.
DAVE: Now, astronomers are guided by observations about
the real universe while we designed Tarski's World, the program.
Coming up with a set of axioms that describes what
a Tarski's World is like is relatively straightforward.
Let's start by thinking about some of the first facts we told you about Tarski's World.
We've already been considered one of them,
namely that every object is either a Tet,
a cube or a dodec.
That was pretty much the first thing we said.
JOHN: Okay. Now, because the predicate symbols indicate the shapes
of the objects that follows that nothing can have two of these properties.
There's nothing that can be both a tetrahedron and a cube for example.
So we'll say that "it's not the case that there is
an x such that x is both at tetrahedron and a cube".
Of course, there are other sentences which say that no objects can be
both a tetrahedron and a dodecahedron and the same for dodecahedra and cubes.
So we'll write those.
These three sentences are also true in every Tarski's World.
They prevent any object from having two shapes at the same time.
DAVE: Now, the program is designed so that you
can't create an object with two shapes at the same time.
Making an object into a cube changes it from whatever it was before.
So these axioms reflect that design decision and more fundamentally,
both reflect the fact that no object can have two shapes at the same time.
JOHN: We could not have designed Tarski's World so that
objects could have two shapes at the same time,
and so these axioms are required to make the predicates mean what we want them to mean.
By contrast, we could have designed the program to have additional shapes, spheres say.
This was an arbitrary choice on our part.
But given that we have made that choice,
the first axiom must also be true.
DAVE: Now corresponding to the three shape predicates,
there are three size predicates.
Again, we said that there are only three sizes and so we have the axiom "for all x
(Small(x) or Medium(x) or Large(x))".
Because an object can only have one size at a time,
we need the sentences to say that "it's not
the case there is an object that is small and medium".
"There's no object that small and large" and
"there's no object that simultaneously medium and large".
JOHN: So here's an example of a Tarski's World truth; "for all x,
parenthesis, if x is not small,
then x is either medium or large".
If an object isn't small,
then it must be either medium or large.
It's a Tarski's World truth.
It's also a first-order consequence of the axioms governing the size predicates.
DAVE: So our idea is to build a set of
sentences which completely capture the rules governing Tarski's World.
Then we'll have a test for Tarski's World truth.
We'll reduce the problem to showing that
a sentence is a first-order consequences of these axioms.
We aren't going to present a complete set of axioms,
but we are going to talk about a few more.
JOHN: There are some other size related predicates, namely;
"Larger", "Smaller", and "SameSize".
Here are some axioms that describe how the "SameSize" predicate works.
The first says that we have- "if we have two objects that are both small,
then these objects are the same size".
This clearly describes part of the meaning of the "SameSize" predicate.
There are two more similar sentences for the other sizes.
"If two objects are medium,
they're the same size" and so forth.
These sentences tell us when we can say that two shapes are the same size.
But what if we already know that they are?
This sentence says that "if two blocks are
the same size and one is small then the other is too".
"For all x for all y, if x is small and x is the same size as y,
then y is small",
and of course the same is true for the other sizes.
DAVE: The first group of these axioms tells us how to tell when two objects are the same size,
if they're both small then they're the same size and so on.
The second group tells us how to use the fact that two objects are the same size.
If we know that one object is large and it's the same size as another object,
then we know that other object is also large.
The two remaining size predicates,
"Smaller" and "Larger" are closely related.
In fact, we can describe this relationship using a formula,
"for all x and for all y,
if x is larger than y,
it's equivalent to being- to y being smaller than x".
JOHN: Right. So using this fact means that we
only have to provide axioms for one of these predicates.
Here are the axioms for "Larger".
"For all x and all y,
if x is large and y is not large,
then x is larger than y".
And "for all x, for all y,
if x is not small and y is small,
then x is larger than y".
And similarly, "for all x and all y,
if x is larger than y,
then x can't be small and y can't be large".
And "for all x and all y,
if x is larger than y and y is medium,
then x is large".
And "for all x and all y,
if x is larger than y and x is medium,
then y is small".
Again, the first pair of axioms allow us to infer that one object is larger than another,
and the second to use- is- gives- allows us to use that fact.
DAVE: It turns out,
and this is probably not obvious,
that these axioms completely describe the "Larger" relation.
Of course, there are many alternative equivalent formulations for this,
but we think that these axioms are pretty clear.
JOHN: By now, we hope that you can see how you might go about extending this set of
axioms to a set of rules for completely describing the properties of Tarski's worlds.
It's unfortunately, not smooth sailing.
There are many interactions between the position predicates; particularly,
"Between" and "Adjoins" that put the exhibition of
the complete set of axioms for Tarski's World beyond the scope of this lecture.
We're going to finish by talking about some of the simpler axioms for
position predicates and there will be exercises that investigate this further.
So let's think about the predicates just the predicates "LeftOf",
"RightOf", and "SameColumn".
The first predicate we'll consider is "SameColumn".
So all of these are obvious properties of the "SameColumn" predicate.
"Every object is in the same column as itself".
"If x is in the same column as y, then y is in the same column as x".
And "if x and y are in the same column and y and z are in the same column,
then x and z must be in the same column".
JOHN: The "LeftOf" predicate has a quite dissimilar set of properties.
"No object is to the left of itself".
"If x is to the left of y,
then y is definitely not to the left of x".
But like "SameColumn", "if x is to the left of y and y is to the left of z,
then x is to the left of z".
DAVE: As we did for "Larger" and "Smaller",
we can simply observe that "LeftOf" and "RightOf", are
inv- inverses and avoid providing explicit axioms for "RightOf",
provided we have the axiom "for all x,
for all y, LeftOf(x,y) is equivalent to RightOf(y,x)".
And you should notice that the predicates "FrontOf", "BackOf",
and "SameRow" are exactly analogous to "LeftOf",
"RightOf", and "SameColumn" and,
therefore, give another similar collection of axioms.
JOHN: At this point, things get complicated.
For example, the "LeftOf" and "SameColumn" predicates interact.
It's a fact that, uh, "if a is to the left of b and b is in the same column as c,
then a is to the left of c". So we could go on for all-
all day listing all of the various facts that relate these and other predicates and,
eventually, we'd come up with a complete set of axioms.
But that's not the real takeaway from this lecture.
DAVE: Right. The real thing we want you to take away is that we can
define all kinds of specialized notions of truth for different domains.
Facts that are true in number theory,
facts that are true in astronomy,
things that are true in economics, and so on.
What we mean is given a particular set of axioms that
describe how the particular area of study behaves,
then the things that are true in that domain are just the things
that are first-order consequences of the relevant axioms,
things that are true in every situation like that.
JOHN: Tarski's World truths are just a special case of this.
Tarski's World truths are sentences that are first-order consequences of
the axioms that describe the way that Tarski's worlds are designed to work.
But the idea behind this,
called "the axiomatic method",
is an important principle which enables us to use the techniques of
first-order logic and apply them to a wide variety of subject matter.
DAVE: In this last video of the class,
we've put our knowledge of first-order logic to work.
We've investigated equivalences that hold between quantified sentences.
First, we investigated equivalences involving the first-order quantifiers,
together with the propositional connectives.
JOHN: The first of these were the De Morgan laws for quantifiers.
These describe how the quantifiers work together with the negation connective.
One of the consequences of these laws is that it is immediately possible to see that we
do not need both the universal and existential quantifier in our language.
These quantifiers are inter-definable,
and having both does not increase the expressive power of the language.
DAVE: But if we didn't have both quantifiers,
the translations of many common natural language sentences would be very unnatural.
We define our language to contain both the quantifiers so that
these English sentences will have direct translations.
JOHN: We also investigated the relationships between
the quantifiers and the binary conjunction and disjunction connectives.
We discovered that there were elegant equivalences
involving the universal quantifier and conjunction,
and also the existential quantifier and disjunction.
But the relationship between the other pairings is not so nice.
DAVE: We also investigated
some surprisingly useful equivalences involving
vacuous quantification and bound variable renaming.
Now, all of these equivalences together could be used to define
a normal form for quantified sentences that we called prenex normal form.
When a sentence is in prenex form,
it consists of a collection of quantifiers,
the prefix, dominating a single propositional formula.
Each sentence of FOL is equivalent to a formula in prenex normal form,
in fact, to many.
JOHN: The final topic of this lecture concerned Tarski's World truths.
We introduced this notion early on in the course.
The sentences of Tarski's World truth if it's true in
every world that can be built using the Tarski's World program.
Now, every logical truth is a Tarski's World truth,
but some Tarski's World truths are not logical truths.
That's because Tarski's Worlds are governed by much stricter rules than other situations,
including the real-world or other imaginary kinds of situations.
DAVE: We described how it's possible to
describe these additional rules using first-order sentences.
These sentences describe rules which govern
the predicates of Tarski's World and the properties of the worlds.
A Tarski's World truth is a sentence which is true in
any world or any situation that obeys these additional rules,
or it's a sentence, which is a first-order consequence of the conjunction of those rules.
JOHN: A Tarski's World truth is a first-order consequences of the set
of rules which describe exactly what Tarski's Worlds are like.
DAVE: Well, we've reached the end of this course.
We have one more video in which we summarize the work that we've
done in the entire course and the key results that we've obtained.
JOHN: And, of course,
you'll need to complete the final exam.
The summary video would be a good place to start when you're studying for that exam.
We'll see you over at the final video. Until then.
DAVE: Bye-bye.
[MUSIC].
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
