[MUSIC] DAVE: Hi. I'm Dave Barker-Plummer.
JOHN: And I'm John Etchemendy.
Welcome to the Semantics of First-order Logic.
DAVE: We're gonna go straight down to work. Are you're ready, John?
JOHN: I certainly am, and we hope that you're ready too.
DAVE: We use language for many things.
To entertain by writing novels, plays, or poetry,
to make jokes, to convince people of political positions,
or to describe our emotions, for example.
One important role of language is to communicate knowledge.
In any field of study,
we make statements about the situations that we're concerned with,
describe regularities that we observe,
and eventually, build theories that explain the world and its behavior.
JOHN: In some circumstances, it's important to be
extremely precise about the claims that you're making so
that you can be sure that the people with whom you're talking understand
exactly what you intend to say, and what you do not intend to say.
Now, while natural languages like English are very useful in
a wide variety of situations such as those that Dave just mentioned.
It's difficult to be precise in these languages.
DAVE: In fact, one of the strengths of natural language is that they allow us to be ambiguous,
to use rhetorical devices such as hyperbole and metaphor and to
suggest ideas not strictly contained in the words that we say.
This is part of the power and attraction of natural languages.
But there are circumstances in which the presence of ambiguity is
not helpful when where complete precision is required.
JOHN: The language of mathematics,
with its inventory of symbols and associated meanings,
is a striking example of a language that's defined to be completely precise.
Mathematicians examining a piece of
mathematics can be certain that they understand exactly
what the claims are being made and whether or not they follow one from another.
Computer programming languages are similarly precise,
allowing programmers to decide exactly what sequence of
actions they want the machine to carry out with no ambiguity.
DAVE: In this course, we'll study the language of first-order logic which is
designed to make precise statements about any topic.
First-order logic is one of
the most significant and most widely applied intellectual developments
from the 20th century.
First-order logic grew out of work in the philosophy of
mathematics and has grown to be a tool used in many disciplines,
from philosophy and mathematics, to linguistics,
psychology, computer science, and artificial intelligence.
JOHN: But before we go on,
we've got to describe an unfortunate fact about your instructors.
We agree that the expression "first-order logic" is long and cumbersome,
and when we're writing,
we often abbreviate this as the acronym FOL.
What we don't agree on however is how to pronounce the acronym.
I always say F-O-L,
spelling out the letters of the acronym.
Dave usually says FOL,
because there's fewer syllables.
Now, we're sorry about this,
but you'll just have to get used to it.
Just like Dave is used to saying tomayto when he really wants to say tomahto.
DAVE: Anyway, first-order logic-
FOL.
FOL, is the basic logical language.
It's based on a very small number of primitive concepts,
so it's pretty easy to learn.
It's also very powerful.
You can use it to express many important notions.
FOL is clearly the right starting point for anyone who wants to understand the logic.
You've come to the right place.
JOHN: By "syntax", we mean the grammar of the language.
Essentially, the syntax of a language tells you what words or symbols
you can place next to one another to create an expression of the language.
When we discuss the syntax of FOL,
we'll introduce ideas like "predicate" and" individual symbols",
"connectives" and "quantifiers", and "formulas" and "sentences".
These are names for the pieces of the language,
like the words" verb" and "adjective" when discussing English.
DAVE: By "semantics", we mean how expressions in the language come to have a meaning,
in particular, what claim a sentence makes about the world.
When we discuss semantics,
we'll talk about "relations" and "individuals",
"worlds" and "models", and "satisfaction" and "truth".
The ideas in this second group,
semantics, are the fundamental ideas that we want you to learn in this course.
Syntax is a necessary evil which allows us to uncover those ideas.
[MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
