JOHN: We'll learn the language of first order logic in two phases.
In the first phase, we'll introduce a piece of
the language that we call "propositional logic".
At the end of this first phase,
we'll investigate the properties of this small language
before moving on to extend it to the complete language of FOL.
DAVE: In some ways, the two parts of the language work quite
differently and it's worth identifying
the smaller language of propositional logic for two reasons.
The first is that sometimes the language of
propositional logic is just what you need for your particular purpose.
The language is smaller and simpler,
and you should use this tool alone when it's appropriate.
The second reason is that propositional logic is
much less expressive than first-order logic.
So one way in which we can illustrate the power of
the full language of FOL is by pointing out what it can do,
that propositional logic alone cannot.
JOHN: Now, FOL is a general purpose language.
Once you know the language,
you can use it to express ideas about any subject matter that you care to.
DAVE: An astronomer might use the language to describe the ways in which stars,
planets and moons relate to one another,
describing precisely the relations between these objects.
And an economist might describe supply and demand curves,
equilibrium points and so on.
DAVE And, a mathematician might describe topoi,
tensors and other arcane mathy things.
The point is that first order logic is
a general purpose tool that could be used in a large number of situations,
but it serves the same purpose in them all.
Namely, to make clear and unambiguous statements about whatever the topic is at hand.
JOHN: Now, while FOL is a general purpose language in the sense mentioned,
it's also quite limited.
While we can talk about any subject we care to,
the things that we can say about that subject are quite limited.
DAVE: To begin with, we can only state facts about the situation whatever it is.
Sentences of first order logic have to make a claim about the world.
They have to say something that's either true or false.
For example, we can write a sentence like "John is to the left of Dave".
This sentence makes a claim about the world.
It's either true or false,
and we can determine which.
JOHN: Perfectly good English sentences like "ouch!" or "wow!"
Are not expressible in FOL.
They don't make claims about the world.
One of the things that we will be investigating extensively is how we can tell
whether a first-order sentence is true in a particular situation.
More generally, we might ask under
what conditions the first-order sentence would be true.
DAVE: Now FOL is limited in other ways.
Even some sentences that do make claims about the world are not formalizable in FOL.
In particular, we assume that the situations that we talk about using FOL do not change.
The situation is the way it is, as if we've taken a snapshot,
and this is all we can talk about.
A sentence like "John must be to the left of
Dave" is not expressible in FOL for this reason.
JOHN: For related reasons, a sentence like "Dave ought to be
to the left of John" is not expressible in FOL.
Both of these examples use what are known as modal constructions,
and a more complex language than FOL is needed to analyze them.
DAVE: FOL then is a formal model of a fragment of natural language.
It's not the final word in logical languages,
there are many extensions to FOL.
We focus on FOL because it forms the basis of many of these advanced languages,
because it's simple enough to present in an introductory course,
and because the fragment of natural language that it does model is
sufficiently interesting to enable the discussion of many important topics.
JOHN: Now, it's very important to remember that FOL is a model of natural language.
In constructing an artificial language in which to express claims about the world,
we have to make many decisions.
Each of these decisions impacts the degree to which
the language FOL accurately models the natural language.
Like all models, FOL is more or less faithful to the real thing.
When the model makes predictions that are not borne out in the real world,
it's the model that's deficient, not the real-world.
If we were to build a model of the Eiffel Tower and the model
resembled say a suspension bridge with two towers,
then we would say that the model is not very good.
Not that there was something wrong with the Eiffel Tower.
DAVE: Similarly, if FOL says that a sentence is true under
certain circumstances and native speakers of the language say that it's not,
then it's our model, FOL that has failed us.
As we proceed with the development of the language,
we'll try to draw your attention to these decisions and their consequences.
After all, it's important to know not only what our formal model can do,
we also need to know what it cannot do.
[MUSIC]
