[MUSIC] JOHN: As we've said,
FOL can be used to speak about a wide variety of situations.
Most of the time in this course,
we'll use the language to describe simple situations that we call "Blocks Worlds".
In each Blocks World,
there's a collection of blocks which are placed on the squares of a checkerboard.
Each block has a particular size and shape.
DAVE: Now, we are not wildly interested in Blocks Worlds.
They are not what you'd call fascinating or exciting.
In fact, nothing ever happens there.
But they are a particularly good tool for teaching.
Blocks Worlds are simple situations,
so they're easy to understand and talk about.
But they are complex and varied enough that we can describe
all the subtleties of the semantics of FOL using just these worlds.
JOHN: In fact, we think that Blocks Worlds are such a good teaching tool that we've developed
a computer program called Tarski's World
that enables us to create and manipulate these worlds,
and to make claims about them in FOL.
DAVE: The program is named after Alfred Tarski,
a Polish-American logician who pioneered
the semantic approach to logic that you'll learn in this course.
JOHN: You'll be spending a lot of time using Tarski's World.
It's quite a simple program and fun.
And we'll provide you with instructions on how to use it,
so there's no need to worry.
We'll use Tarski's World to illustrate all of the main concepts that we want to describe.
And you'll use it to complete many of the exercises that we'll set as our assignments.
DAVE: We'll be coming back to the subject of the assignments in a little while,
but let's talk a little bit about what you'll do with
Tarski's World and how it will help you learn the language of First-Order Logic.
One of the main skills that we want you to learn is how to translate
from natural languages such as English into FOL and back again.
This skill is key to being able to use FOL to make statements
about your subject of interest and to understand statements written by others.
One common kind of exercise that you will do
involves reading an English sentence and writing it in FOL.
While you do this, you can look at the world and see
perhaps the English sentence is true in this world.
One test for whether your translation is correct is that
the FOL sentence should also be true in
the world and this is something the program can check for you.
JOHN: But Tarski's World enables you to learn other important skills too.
Sometimes we'll ask you to look at a world
and directly write sentences that are true in the world.
Yet other exercises allow you to read sentences about the world
and then make modifications to the world which result in the sentences being true.
Each of these depend on an understanding of the semantics of FOL,
but they approach the ideas from different directions to provide new perspectives.
The program, therefore, allows you to practice
your skills in a variety of different ways,
and together, they allow you to develop
a more complex and nuanced understanding of the formal language.
DAVE: There's one more feature of this course which we think will help you to develop
a complete understanding of the semantics of the language of First-Order Logic.
We've developed an online assessment service which allows you to
receive feedback on your solutions to exercises at anytime day or night.
This service is called the "Grade Grinder".
And the best way to think of it is that the service is like
a teaching assistant who's available 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
When you've completed an exercise or assignment using Tarski's World,
you can send your work to the Grade Grinder to get feedback on how you did.
If it's perfect, then good.
But the report might show that some of your answers are incorrect and in what way.
The Grade Grinder will never tell you the correct answer,
but it should give you enough information to help you
think about what you need to change to fix the problem.
JOHN: And once your work is perfect,
you can send a final copy to us and
your score will automatically appear on the course website.
Our past students have found that these tools are enormously helpful in
learning the language of First-Order Logic and the ideas and concepts that we teach.
The Grade Grinder, in particular,
can be used to avoid getting snagged on simple issues
that are easily resolved once an error has been pointed out.
DAVE: For more substantial issues and questions,
we and our team of TAs are available to
answer questions that arise in your work on the course.
But don't forget the most important resource of all,
your fellow students in the course.
By becoming part of the community of learners,
you'll be able to take advantage of a wide range of
perspectives on the issues and problems that we set in the course.
When you don't understand something,
there will be somebody in the community who can help you.
And you can help others with things that they want to discuss.
Details on how to access the forums and reach us
during the course are available on the course website.
JOHN: And in the next class,
we'll begin our journey studying the language of First-Order Logic.
We'll see you then. [MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
