[MUSIC] JOHN: Hi I'm John and that's boring.
DAVE: And I'm Dave, equally boring [LAUGHTER].
In the last few videos,
we've introduced the expanded language of FOL.
We've described the syntax of the new language,
introducing variables and quantifier symbols.
JOHN: So we've described how to tell whether expressions
constructed using these symbols are sentences,
and how to tell whether these sentences are true or false in particular situations.
DAVE: We're going to start thinking about how we can use
this new language to translate English sentences into FOL.
We want to think about what we can say in the new language and how
to translate fluently from English into FOL and back.
JOHN: In the next two videos,
we're going to describe some ideas about how to do this.
We begin by considering a class of sentences that were first
studied by the ancient Greek philosopher, Aristotle.
Although Aristotle did not have the idea of a quantifier,
these sentences translate into quantified formula of the first order logic.
DAVE: These quantified sentences are important in their own right,
but they also provide some building blocks for
translating complex natural language sentences into FOL.
Many natural language sentences can be built using this kind of sentence.
JOHN: Now we'll also draw attention to some of the pitfalls that you'll
encounter when translating from natural language into FOL.
One important issue is,
how to determine when one quantifier falls into the- in scope of another.
DAVE: In natural language, we often don't make this clear
relying on context to facilitate our understanding,
but of course in FOL, we'll need to be precise about this issue.
And that's the topic we'll take up later in this lecture.
For now, let's turn our attention to the Aristotelian forms.
JOHN: Now we've already seen the simplest sentences constructed using the language.
These are sentences with just one quantifier with an atomic subformula.
The sentence "for all x Cube(x)",
says that everything is a cube.
While the sentence, "there is an x,
Large(x)" says that something is large.
DAVE: So it's actually more usual to make claims about
a range of objects within the domain rather than about every object in the domain.
For example, we might want to say that "all of
the cubes are small" or that "there is a large dodecahedron".
The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle,
the founder of the study of Logic,
investigated these special forms of
quantified sentences and two others that are closely related.
We call these the "Aristotelian forms".
Sentences in these forms are not only commonly occurring on their own,
but they often form building blocks from which we can build more complex sentences.
JOHN: Aristotle sente- studies sentences which take the following four forms.
"All P's are Qs".
"Some Ps are Qs",
"no P's are Qs" and "some Ps are not Qs".
In these schematic sentences,
we intend "P" and "Q" to be arbitrary properties like being a cube,
being large or being to the left of a large tetrahedron.
JOHN: The English sentence, "all cubes are small",
is if the first form.
It uses the property "is a cube" in place of the property "P",
and the property "Q" is replaced by "is small".
One important observation is that we can think of
FOL expressions which contain one free variable,
the standing for properties.
The expression "Cube(x)" is a way of referring to the property of being a cube.
The objects that satisfy
this expression are just those objects that have this property.
JOHN: We translate sentences of the form "all Ps are Qs" using FOL sentences that look like this,
"for all x, if P(x) then Q(x)".
So the sentence, "all cubes are small" would be written as "for all x,
if x is a cube then x is small".
DAVE: So let's think about why this is the right translation of the English sentence.
Well, this sentence is true if
every object in the world satisfies the embedded implication.
That's what the universal quantifier means.
Suppose that the world contains a small cube with the name "s". This object satisfies
the formula "Cube(x) implies Small(x)" because the formula "Cube(s) implies Small(s)" is true.
"s" is a small cube so "Cube(s)" is true and "Small(s)" is true,
and that makes the implication true.
So "s" or indeed any small cube will satisfy the formula.
JOHN: Now suppose we have an object that's not a cube.
Let's suppose that it's a dodecahedron and it's called
"d". This block also satisfies the formula.
That's because the sentence "Cube(d)" is false.
"d" is a dodecahedron after all.
Since "Cube(d)" is false,
then the implication "Cube(d) implies Small(d)" is true.
Remember implications are always true if the antecedent is false.
So "d" or indeed any block that is not a cube satisfies the formula.
The only other kind of object that we might have is a cube that's not small.
A block like this,
does not satisfy the embedded formula.
Suppose that the world contains a large cube,
say "l". The sentence "Cube(l) implies Small(l)" is false,
since the antecedent is true "l" is a cube but the consequent is false.
So "l" doesn't satisfy this formula and nor does any other cube that is not small.
JOHN: So what this means is that the only way in which a sentence "for all x, Cube(x),
then Small(x)" can be false is if the domain contains
a cube that is not small or put another way,
if not all of the cubes are small.
The sentence will be true if all of the blocks in the world are small,
just like the corresponding English sentence,
"all cubes are small".
DAVE: We can use Tarski's World to help us to see this.
Let's begin by evaluating this sentence "for all x (Cube(x) implies
Small(x))" in the world in which there are only small cubes.
As we expect, this sentence is true in this world.
We'll play the game to see what happens if we
pretend to believe that the sentence is false in this situation.
So we'll start the game and commit to false.
JOHN: Okay. So supposing that we think it's false,
then Tarski's World is going to ask us to
choose an object that does not satisfy the formula,
"Cube(x) then Small(x)".
It doesn't matter which object we pick, obviously,
so let's choose this one, Tarski's world would now name "n1", okay?
So Tarski's World writes the sentence as "not Cube(n1) or Small(n1)",
since that's the equivalent form and points out
that we believe that this sentence is false, which we do.
If we believe the whole thing is false.
So you must now believe that both "not Cube(n1)" and "Small(n1)" are false.
Obviously, "Small(n1)" is true not false,
and so we're incorrect.
Notice that if TW had chosen the sentence,
"not Cube(n1)", then we would have won since "n1" is indeed a cube.
But Tarski's World is not that stupid.
DAVE: Which is good because the formula is in fact true in this world.
Now let's consider a situation in which there are blocks that are not cubes.
Let's change the world so that there's a small dodecahedron and a medium tetrahedron.
When we evaluate the formula,
you can see that it's still true.
That's because all- all of the cubes in this world are small,
so that's what we were hoping for.
Again, let's see what happens when we play the game trying
to defend the position that the sentence is false.
JOHN: Okay. So we- we claim the sentence is false,
and the game proceeds exactly the same way except that we have
more choices when we try to choose objects that don't satisfy the formula.
So let's play choosing the small dodecahedron as our counter example object.
The game proceeds just as before,
but it's even worse for us.
We believe both that "not Cube(n1)" is false, that is,
we have to believe that "n1" is a cube which obviously isn't,
and we believe that "Small(n1)" is false,
which, again, is not false but true.
DAVE: If we play again,
but this time choose the medium-sized tetrahedron,
then things go equally badly.
"not Cube(n1)" is false,
that is we have to believe that "n1" is a cube,
but is in fact a tetrahedron.
The fact that "Small(n1)" is false,
isn't gonna help us because Tarski's World is gonna choose the formula "not Cube(n1)".
It can choose either formula because we believe that both are false.
JOHN: Okay. So let's now make one of the cubes,
one of the blocks, into a- a middle-sized cube.
When we evaluate the sentence in this world,
we're going to see that its, surprise, it's false.
Now, if we play the game committed to its being false,
we'll be able to pick a block that's a counterexample to
the claim because we can choose this medium cube.
The game proceeds as before,
when we must believe that it is cube and that is not small and these are,
in fact, true of this block.
So we've seen that the sentence is true,
unless there is a cube in the world that's not small.
That is, the sentence is true,
if every cube is small,
which is what we wanted to translate.
The only blocks that do not satisfy
the embedded formula are those which make the antecedent of the implication true,
that is they are cubes,
but that make the consequent false,
i.e, they're not small.
JOHN: So going back to our sentences.
The second Aristotelian form is "some Ps are Qs",
will translate this into FOL using the sentence.
"There is an x (P(x) and Q(x))".
DAVE: Again, "P" and" "Q stand for any property that we might care to name.
Let's imagine that we wanted to translate this sentence.
"Some tetrahedron is medium-sized".
We would translate this sentence as,
"there exists x, (Tet(x) and Medium(x))".
JOHN: Notice that this sentence is not like the universally quantified form "for all Ps or Qs".
This sentence has a conjunction in the embedded formula, not an implication.
DAVE: That might not be so surprising actually.
Notice that the sentence,
"all cubes are small",
say something very different from the sentence,
"all small things are cubes".
This is reflected in the use of the implication connective which is not commutative.
That is, it's sensitive to the choice of which property is
used in the antecedent and which is used as the consequent.
On the other hand, the sentence,
"there is a small cube",
says exactly the same thing as,
"there is a small thing, that's a cube".
Since both things must be true of an object to make the sentence true,
it doesn't matter which order we place the two properties.
The fact that conjunction is commutative connective, reflects this observation.
JOHN: Okay. So why does this formula a good translation of the English sentence?
The first-order sentence is true only if some objects satisfies the embedded formula,
"Tet(x) and Small(x)".
Since this is a conjunction,
such an object would have to satisfy both "Tet(x)" and "Small(x)",
that is, it would have to be both small and a tetrahedron.
So the sentence is true only if there's a small tetrahedron in the domain,
which is, in fact,
exactly what the English sentence claims.
DAVE: Again, we can use Tarski's World to help us
investigate the truth conditions of the sentence.
If we play assuming that the sentence is true,
then Tarski's World will require us to select an object satisfying "Cube(x) and Small(x)".
We believe that the sentence, "there exists x,
(Tet(x) and Small(x))" is true,
so we must believe that some object satisfies "Tet(x) and Small(x)".
And so we will be asked to choose a block that does,
in fact, satisfy "Tet(x) and Small(x)".
In fact, there is none that satisfies that formula.
Maybe we select the small dodecahedron.
So that means we must believe that that object we
selected is both a tetrahedron and small.
And of course, that fails because that block is not a tetrahedron.
JOHN: Okay. So let's try to play committed to the sentence being false.
Then Tarski's World will attempt to prove us wrong by selecting a small tetrahedron,
which it will be able to do if there is,
in fact, a small tetrahedron in the world.
That is, if the sentence is,
in fact, true, will contradict in our claim.
DAVE: But it turns out that in this world, of course,
there is no such block for Tarski's World to pick.
So it's picked, again,
it picked the same dodecahedron that we did, uh,
but it will lose the game because we believe for example,
"Tet(n1)" is false,
when it picked this block.
The other two Aristotelian forms are closely related to the two that we've just discussed.
First, "no Ps are Qs".
We could think of the sentence of the form "no Ps are Qs" in one of two different ways.
One, is that there's no object which is both a "P" and a "Q".
This will give us the formula;
"it's not the case that there exists x,
(P(x) and Q(x))".
JOHN: But another way to think about this sentence is that it says that
every object that is a "P" is not also a "Q".
In this way of thinking about things,
we obtain the sentence;
"for all x, if x is a P,
then it's not a Q".
When we discuss the notion of first-order equivalence in the next lecture,
we will see that these two formulas are, in fact, equivalent.
That, of course, means that either is
a good translation of the or-original English sentence.
DAVE: So we've written the implicational form here on the screen,
but we'll come back to the possibility of the, ah,
conjunction form being existential form being,
ah, a good translation later.
Perhaps you'll find one of these formulas
a more intuitive translation of the English sentence, that's fine.
Stick with one you feel comfortable with,
at least until we demonstrate that the forms are equivalent.
JOHN: Right. And I actually think that the- the negative existential are more common,
is a more natural form.
DAVE: Ah, this is another thing which we disagree.
JOHN: We disagree, I know. [LAUGHTER] Okay.
So the final sentence form that we haven't talked about yet is;
"some Ps are not Qs".
Now, this says that there's some object which has
the property "P" which does not have the property "Q".
The natural translation of this sentence is the following;
"there is an x, (P(x) and not Q(x))",
and I bet we agree on that, Dave.
DAVE: We do agree on that John [LAUGHTER].
So we're not gonna to present more examples of these sentences
but you should be able to go back to Tarski's World,
and play the game with sentences of these kinds,
to make sure that you understand how formal sentences of this form track
the meaning of their English counterparts
just as we did for the first two kinds of sentences.
[MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
