[MUSIC] JOHN: The Aristotelian forms give us
a handy tool kit for translating
some commonly occurring sentence forms into first-order logic.
But there are many sentences that do not obviously fit into these forms.
DAVE: Some sentences are in fact in these forms,
but can be hard to see.
Then again, there are sentences that just simply aren't of this type.
Let's think first of all about sentences of the first type,
sentences that disguised Aristotelian forms.
JOHN: So one important trick when translating sentences into FOL,
is to recognize that the formula playing the roles of "P" and
"Q" in the Aristotelian forms can be actually quite complex.
All of the examples that we've used so far,
have had really simple atomic formulas playing these roles.
But we can get more fancy with these formulas.
For example, suppose we want to translate the English sentence.
"Every cube is to the left of a and to the right of b" into FOL.
Now this sentence is of the form "all Ps are Qs".
That is, it's of the form,
the first Aristotelian form that we've discussed.
In this case, the property that is playing the role of
"Q" is this complex property of "being to the left of a and to the right of b".
Recall that we've said that a formula with
a single free variable could be thought of as representing a property,
the property that the object must have to satisfy the formula.
So the property of being to the left of "a" and to the right of "b",
is expressed as the complex formula "LeftOf(x,a)
and RightOf(x, b)".
So if we want to say that every cube has that property,
then we say for "all x parenthesis,
if x is a cube,
then parenthesis LeftOf(x,a)
and RightOf(x, b)".
This is just the Aristotelian form, "all Ps are Qs",
with a complex property represented by a non-atomic formula,
in the consequent of the implication.
DAVE: And of course, we can put complex formula into
the other forms or into the antecedent position of this form or both.
Consider this sentence, "some small cubes do not adjoin b".
Okay. So that one's a fun one.
This sentence is of the form,
"some Ps are not Qs".
That is we want to translate it as "there is an x,
(P(x) and not Q(x))".
Where "P" is the property of being a small cube,
and "Q" is the property of adjoining "b".
DAVE: So the required sentence is,
"there exists x ((Small(x) and Cube(x)) and not Adjoins(x, b))".
We've included parentheses around the formula playing the role of
"P". Even though this isn't necessary to make the sentence well formed,
it does better show the relationship between
the original sentence and the translation though.
JOHN: We're going to come back to the Aristotelian forms in a little while.
But before we do that,
we should consider what happens when we have multiple quantifiers in a sentence.
All of the examples that we've looked at so far have just contained a single quantifier.
DAVE: Right. But of course, sentences can contain multiple quantifiers.
These quantifiers can appear anywhere within a complex formula.
We're going to start with the simplest cases
of sentences that contain multiple quantifiers.
These are sentences with two quantifiers,
that quantifiers of the same type,
either both universal or both existential.
And further, we're going to assume that they're outside of
the sentence not embedded within some complex structure.
JOHN: Okay. So here's a good example of,
of such a sentence,
"for all x, for all y, Likes(x,y)".
So what does this sentence mean?
DAVE: Well, remember that sentences with one free variable represent a property,
and a universal quantifier says that every object has that property.
So this formula "for all x,
for all y, Likes(x, y)", is true,
just when every object has the property "for all y Likes(x, y)".
That is, every object has the property that it likes every object.
JOHN: Why? Because every object has to satisfy the property.
So for example, a has to satisfy the property.
That is, it must be the case that "for all y Likes(a,
y)", has to be true.
And this is only true if "a" likes every object.
So the original formula is true just when every object likes every object.
DAVE: Going in the other direction,
suppose we start with an English sentence.
"Everything adjoins everything".
This is just like the previous sentence.
It's translated as "for all x,
for all y, Adjoins(x, y)".
Every object has some property.
Which property? The property that it adjoins everything.
JOHN: So Dave is it possible for that sentence to be true in Tarski's World?
Mh, let's see. How about
a situation like this in which there are two blocks that adjoin one another.
Do you think that the sentence is true in this world?
JOHN: Well, it looks like it's a possibility.
So let's find out.
When we evaluate the sentence, Tarski's World says that it's false.
So how can that be?
So let's play the game to find out.
DAVE: Okay. We'll play the game committed to the idea that the sentence should have been true.
Tarski's World says, that we have to believe that
every object x satisfies "for all y Adjoins(x,y)".
Tarski's World chooses a block and calls it "n1".
We have to believe that every blog adjoins this "n1".
JOHN: And that means, that we must believe that every block has to satisfy "Adjoins(n1,y)".
But notice that Tarski's World selects the same block again,
and says that we must believe that this block adjoins itself. That's cheating.
DAVE: Aha, no object adjoins itself.
So this sentence is false.
We were wrong in saying that the original sentence is true.
This illustrates the point that
both universal quantifiers range over the same set of objects,
the whole domain, all of the objects.
It's tempting to read our original sentence as saying,
that every object adjoins every _other_ block,
but that's not what it says.
We'll see how to translate that sentence in a second.
JOHN: Okay. So another possibility is that there are two existential quantifiers in a sentence.
For example, consider the sentence.
"There is an x, there is a y, Likes(x, y)".
Take a moment to see if you can decide what this sentence means.
You can pause the video if you want.
DAVE: Now, roughly this sentence means that "someone likes someone".
First of all, how can this sentence be true. Well, it's true.
Just when there's some object in the domain that satisfies this formula,
"there exists y Likes(x, y)".
This formula represents the property of liking somebody, "x" likes somebody.
Any object that satisfies this property likes someone or in logic speak,
an object satisfies this formula if there's some object that that object likes.
JOHN: Again, this sentence would be true if there's an object that likes itself.
Both "x" and "y", remember,
can be satisfied by the same object.
DAVE: But suppose we wanted to translate the sentence,
some object likes some other different object,
then we need to modify the property that we need to be satisfied by "x".
Instead, we need the property,
"there's a y that's different from x, that x Like"s.
That is, "there exists y, open parenthesis,
x is not identical to y and Likes(x, y)".
The complete sentence that we want then is "there exists x,
there exists y, (x is not equal to y and Likes(x, y))".
JOHN: Notice that this is similar to one of the Aristotelian forms.
The in- inner formula says that some "P" is
"Q" where "P" is the property of being different from "x",
and "Q" is the property of being liked by "x".
DAVE: So if we wanted to say that every object likes every other object,
then this is also similar to the Aristotelian form,
"all P's are Q's",
where "P" is the property of being different from "x",
and "Q" is the property of being liked by "x".
So the sentence is "for all x for all y,
open parenthesis, x not equal to y implies Likes(x, y))".
"Every x has the property that everything different
from x is liked by x."
Incidentally, the identity predicate turns out to be critical
to expressing these kinds of claims and many others.
That's why we consider it to be an essential part of FOL unlike the "Cube" predicate say.
JOHN: Okay. Now, it's time to consider a more difficult case.
When a sentence has mixed quantifiers,
mixed quantifiers meaning that it
has more than one quantifier and they're of different types.
In the next example,
we'll consider the situation in which there's
one universal quantifier and one existential quantifier,
and that these quantifiers are not embedded within
a complex formula apart from the other quantifier
DAVE: Okay. Suppose we want to say that there's some person that likes everyone.
The situation that I'm imagining is that there's this person,
John say, and that John likes everyone in the domain.
Perhaps everyone in the recording studio or something.
How would we translate that sentence, "John likes everyone"?
Something like this.
"For all y Likes(john, y)".
JOHN: Now, the original sentence didn't say that I like everyone.
Only that there is a person- some person that likes everyone.
And so the sentence that we would like is the following. "There is an x.
For all y Likes(x,y)".
So there is something such that- that thing likes everything.
DAVE: Now, there's something very important about sequences of quantifiers of mixed type.
Sequences like this, there exists for all.
This sentence does not mean the same thing as
the superficially similar sentence "for all y there exists x Likes(x,y)".
This sentence is obtained just by switching the order of
a quant- universal and existential quantifiers
leaving the rest of the sentence unchanged.
Can you see what the sentence says?
JOHN: Okay. Take a minute to consider the sentence.
Pause the video if necessary.
And while you work out what you think it says- it means, we'll wait.
Okay. So the way to read this sentence is that it says,
every object y has some property.
And what is that property?
Well, it's the property that someone "x" likes them.
So roughly, we would say that "everybody has someone who likes them".
It should be clear that this doesn't mean the same thing as the previous sentence,
that some particular person likes everyone.
For example, this new sentence is true if John likes himself and I like myself,
and we're the only people in the domain.
The new sentence says that everyone domain like someone.
I like myself, John like himself,
this sentence is true.
JOHN: But in this situation,
and we stress that this is purely hypothetical,
neither of us likes the other.
And so there's no one in the domain who likes
everyone, which is what is required to make the first sentence true.
Switching the order of the quantifiers of different types within
a sequence of quantifiers changes the meaning of the sentence.
Two sentences obtained like this are not logically equivalent.
They are not true in the same situations as we've just seen.
DAVE: Now, we didn't say this earlier.
The switching the order of quantifiers of the same type within
a sentence does in fact preserve the meaning of the sentence.
JOHN: Now, we're going to return to a discussion of the Aristotelian forms.
But this time, with complex, and in particular,
quantified formula's expressing the properties that play a role in the forms.
This will result in a situation in which there may be many quantifiers of mixed types
within a sentence not all nicely gathered
together as in the examples that we've used so far.
DAVE: Spoiler alert. It's a fact that any sentence which has quantifiers embedded within it in
arbitrary positions is equivalent to a formula which consists of a sequence of
quantifiers which are outside of a formula which is completely free of further quantifiers.
A sentence like this is said to be in "prenex" form,
and we'll be discussing this result and demonstrating its truth in a later lecture.
JOHN: So right now though,
we're just gonna focus on translation and on how to
translate some more complex sentences involving quantifiers.
Suppose we want to translate the sentence,
"Every small green cube is cold".
Well, this is an example of an Aristotelian form "all P's of Q's".
But the "P" in this case is the noun phrase "small green cube".
JOHN: Let's start by thinking about the sentence.
"a is a small green cube".
This just says that "a" has the conjunction of the properties small, green, and cube.
So this would be translated as "Small(a)
and Green(a) and Cube(a)".
So the property of being a small green cube is represented by the formula "Small(z)
and Green(z) and Cube(z)".
JOHN: So to say that every object that has this property is
also cold is just the sentence "for all z,
parenthesis, if z is small,
and z is green,
and z is a cube,
then z is cold".
DAVE: So you can see that the sentences in the, uh,
different positions in the Aristotelian form can get quite complicated.
Now, suppose we want to say "everything to the left of some cube is a dodecahedron".
Notice that this has two quantifier words in it, "everything" and "some".
So we might expect that to be two quantifiers in the translation of this formula.
But basically, this is of the Aristotelian form,
every object with some property has some other property "all P's are Q's".
In this case, every object that has the property of being to the left
of some cube has the additional property of being a dodecahedron.
JOHN: And this is pretty complicated.
How do we say that an object has the property of being to the left of a cube?
Well, one way to think about this is to think about the related sentence,
"a is to the left of some cube".
So what this says is that there is
some object which is a cube and "a" is to the left of it,
and this is an Aristotelian form which paraphrases the example.
So the property of being to the left of some cube would be expressed as,
"there is a y, (Cube(y)
and LeftOf(x, y))".
Objects which satisfy this formula for the "x" must have a cube to their left.
DAVE: So returning to our example sentence,
we want to say that every object that has
this property also has the property of being a dodecahedron.
Well, "all P's are Q's",
now we have our "P", "exist y,
Cube(y) and LeftOf(x, y)".
And so the resulting sentence is "for all x,
if there exists a y, such that y is a cube and x is to the left of y,
then x is a dodecahedron".
JOHN: Okay. So we're getting pretty complex.
The important thing here is that
quite complex sentences can be analyzed using the Aristotelian forms,
and that such an analysis can help us to translate
these sentences from English into first-order logic.
In this video, we've talked about the task of
translating between first-order logic and natural language
DAVE: We first introduced the Aristotelian forms.
These are sentences that occur quite commonly,
and they're both interesting in their own right and can also
serve as building blocks to build more complex sentences.
Right. These forms relate two properties to one another.
These- these properties can sometimes be described by simple atomic expressions,
sometimes by more complicated propositional forms like conjunctions.
And of course, sometimes, they might be first-order expressions themselves.
Since the Aristotelian forms are quite common,
they often appear embedded within larger forms.
DAVE: And in the second half of the lecture,
we talked about some common pitfalls when dealing with quantified sentences.
The first was the observation that when you have
a sentence involving both universal and existential quantifiers,
it makes a huge difference which is inside the scope of the other.
JOHN: This is very important and doubly difficult.
Because in natural language,
we do not typically make these relations explicit,
we rely on context to make the determination.
But when translating into FOL,
we have to consider the relationship between the quantifiers and make that explicit.
DAVE: And finally, we pointed out a common error in
understanding sentences with two universal quantifiers.
It's often tempting to treat a formula like this as
saying for every "x" and for every other "y".
To write a sentence that says that,
you have to explicitly say that "x" and "y" have to
be satisfied by different objects in the sentence,
and you do this by using a negated equality between the objects.
JOHN: The quantifiers range over every object in the domain.
They don't know that they're in the scope of other quantifiers.
DAVE: That's it for this lecture.
In the next one, we'll return to the topic of logical consequence.
We now have a new approximation to the notion of logical consequence,
and we'll investigate the properties of that approximation,
that theory, next time.
JOHN: See you then. [MUSIC]
End of transcript. Skip to the start.
